                                                   Local obstructions in sequences revisited
                                                          Matthieu Rosenfeld, Alexander Shen
                                                   LIRMM, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France
arXiv:2503.20529v1 [math.CO] 26 Mar 2025




                                                                              Abstract
                                                    In this article we consider some simple combinatorial game and a
                                                 winning strategy in this game. This game is then used to prove several
                                                 known results about non-repetitive sequences and approximations with
                                                 denominators from a lacunary sequence. In this way we simplify the
                                                 proofs, improve the bounds and get for free the computable versions
                                                 that required a separate treatment.


                                           1    Introduction
                                           Fifty years ago Erdős [1, p. 96] asked the following question. Let nk be
                                           a lacunary sequence of positive integers, i.e., nk+1 > (1 + ε)nk for some
                                           ε > 0. Can we find a real θ such that all distances from nk θ to the nearest
                                           integer are separated from 0 (exceed some positive δ for all k)? Several
                                           authors then showed that this is indeed the case, and provide some lower
                                           bounds for δ as a function of ϵ. The bounds improved over time, and the
                                           best known asymptotic bound δ = Ω (ε/| log ε|) was obtained by Peres and
                                           Schlag [2]; the computable version of this result was recently proved by
                                           Mourad [3]. Peres ans Schlag proofs relies on (some variant of) the Lovász
                                           Local Lemma, while Mourad’s proof relies on his computable version of the
                                           Lefthanded Local Lemma.
                                               We provide a simple proof of these results that uses some combinatorial
                                           game and a winning strategy in this game (based on Miller’s argument
                                           in [4]). It gives slightly better constants in the bounds and does not require
                                           separate argument for the computable version.
                                               The same game can be applied to sequences without repetitions. A
                                           classical (1906) result of Thue [5] says that there exists an infinite sequence
                                           in a three-letter alphabet that is square-free (does not contain substrings uu
                                           for non-empty strings u). The same question may be asked in a more general
                                           situation where the alphabet is large (even infinite) but for each position
                                           only 3 letters are allowed (the list of the allowed letters may depend on the
                                           position). The existence of such a sequence remains a conjecture [6, p. 215,
                                           Conjecture 1], but for lists of size 4 the corresponding result is proven [7, 6],
                                           and the computable version of this result is proven [3] for lists of size 6. We


                                                                                   1
note that all these results are easy corollaries of the game analysis, and the
computable version does not require special treatment and is valid already
for lists of size 4.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we explain the rules of
the game and a sufficient condition for the existence of a winning strategy
(Theorem 1). We note that this condition can be easily adapted to prove the
existence of a computable winning strategy (Theorem 2). Then in Section 3
we apply this game to the question about forbidden substrings considered
by Miller in [4] (our strategy is a straightforward generalisation of Miller’s
argument used there). In Section 4 we observe that the game can be used
to prove the existence of square-free sequences for 4-list assignments. Then
in Section 7 we show how the game can be applied to Erdős’s question.
Finally, in Section 9 we provide some historical context and discuss the
game approach.


2    The game
We consider a combinatorial game that appears to be the core of several
existence proofs.
    Alice and Bob play an infinite game on the k-ary rooted tree. Initially
Bob is in the root of this tree. His goal is to escape (to infinity) along some
branch of the tree, one edge at a time. Alice tries to block Bob by declaring
some tree vertices as forbidden for him.
    Alice and Bob alternate; Alice starts the game. At each step Alice adds
some vertices to the set F of forbidden vertices (initially empty); then Bob
moves along some tree edge (moving from a vertex to its child). Bob loses if
he gets into a forbidden vertex. Alice loses if Bob never gets into a forbidden
vertex. Of course, without additional restrictions Alice wins the game: she
may forbid all vertices, or all children of current Bob’s vertex, or all vertices
of some level ahead of Bob. To make the game non-trivial, we will require
that Alice does not forbid too many vertices too close to Bob.
    Before formulating the restrictions, let us note that the game can be
reformulated as follows. First, only the subtree rooted at Bob’s current
position matters (other vertices are inaccessible to Bob anyway). So we
may think that at his turn Bob chooses an available (= not forbidden)
child of the current position and the game continues on the corresponding
subtree. At her turn Alice adds some vertices of this subtree to F (making
them unavailable to Bob); the vertices forbidden earlier remain forbidden.
Alice wins if at some point Bob has no available child to choose from, and
Bob wins otherwise. (We also assume that Alice cannot forbid Bob’s current
position, i.e., the root of the current subtree.)
    To formulate the restrictions for Alice, let us fix some β in the range
(1, k). Each vertex of the l-th level of the k-ary rooted tree has weight


                                       2
β −l (so the root has weight 1, each its child has weight 1/β, etc., cf. the
definition of Hausdorff’s outer measure). The weight of a set of vertices is
the sum of their weights. The restriction for Alice is as follows: for every
move the weight of the newly forbidden vertices, measured in the current
subtree, does not exceed some constant ω. In this way, for every choice of
parameters β and ω, we get a game on a k-ary tree called (β, ω, k)-game in
the sequel.

Theorem 1. Assume that for some integer k > 1, some β in (1, k) and
some ω > 0 the inequality
                          β(1 + ω) ⩽ k                           (1)
holds. Then Bob has a winning strategy in the (β, ω, k)-game.

Proof. The winning strategy for Bob is to maintain the following invariant:
after his move (and before the next move of Alice) the total weight of the
forbidden vertices in the current subtree (rooted at Bob’s position) is less
than 1. (This implies that the current position is not forbidden.)
    Initially (before the first move of Alice) this is true, since the weight
is 0. Let us check that Bob can maintain this invariant. After Alice adds
new forbidden vertices (with total weight at most ω) the total weight of
the forbidden vertices in the current subtree is less than 1 + ω, and the
root of the subtree is not forbidden. So all the forbidden vertices are split
among k children of the root, and there is a child whose share is less than
(1 + ω)/k. Bob moves to this child; this increases all the weights in its
subtree by factor β since the obstacles become one step closer, and we note
that β(1 + ω)/k ⩽ 1 by assumption.

    We can use a computable version of this result to construct a computable
path in the tree by playing against the computable strategy for Alice (for
computable β and ω). More precisely, the next move of Alice should consist
of programs that compute

   • a set F of newly forbidden vertices;

   • a modulus of convergence for their total weight.

The first program says for each vertex whether it becomes forbidden, and
the second program gives for every rational ε > 0 some integer N such that
the total weight of all F -vertices of height greater than N is less than ε.
    A special case: Alice explicitly gives a finite list of newly forbidden
vertices.

Theorem 2. Assume that β and ω are computable real numbers satisfying
the same condition as in Theorem 1, and Alice uses a computable strategy.
Then Bob can win against this strategy using a computable path in the k-ary
tree.

                                     3
Proof. Bob can maintain the invariant as before, keeping the total weight of
the forbidden vertices in the subtree as a computable number. Since Alice
behaves computably (in the sense explained above), Bob can update this
data after her move. Then he computes the weights for the children until
he finds a good child (note than the inequality is strict, so such a child can
be found effectively if it exists).

   Note that, since the only thing needed to compute Bob strategy is to be
able to compute the weight of the set of forbidden vertices, if we can do so
quickly then we can quickly compute Bob’s move.


3    Miller’s argument
The idea behind this technique of β-weights was first used by J. Miller [4]
to prove the existence of an infinite sequence avoiding some set of forbidden
factors (contiguous substrings). Let us present his proof as an application
of Theorem 1.
Theorem 3. Let A be a finite alphabet and let F ⊆ A+ be a set of A-words.
Suppose there exists β in (1, |A|) such that
                                             
                                  X
                         β 1 +       β −|f |  ⩽ |A| .
                                 f ∈F

Then there exists an infinite sequence in AN that avoids F.
Proof. Let k be the size of A. Consider the k-ary tree where children are
indexed by letters. Bob constructs a path in this tree, and at every move
Alice forbids all elements of F starting from Bob’s position.

   The computable version can be obtained in the same way using Theo-
rem 2:
Theorem 4. Let A be a finite alphabet and let F ⊆ A+ be a computable set
of A-words. Suppose there exists a computable β ∈ (1, k) such that
                                           
                                X
                        β 1 +      β −|f |  ⩽ |A|
                                 f ∈F

and the series in the left hand side converges computably. Then there exists
an infinite computable sequence in AN that avoids F.
   The construction given by Miller [4, Proposition 2.1] is exactly the same
(he uses letter S instead of F, as well as n instead of k, and c instead of
1/β in our notation). However, extracting a combinatorial game from this
argument allows us to apply the same technique to several other questions
considered in the following sections.

                                        4
4    Nonrepetitive words
A square is a word of the form uu with u a non-empty word, and a square-free
word is a word that contains no squares as factors. For instance, hotshots
is a square, infinite is square-free and repetition contains the square
titi. In 1906, Thue proved that there exists an infinite square-free word
over a three-letter alphabet [5]. This result is often called the first result
in combinatorics on words and many its variants have been studied. Using
Theorem 1, we can construct square-free sequences for all k ⩾ 4. This is
still weaker than Thue’s result, but our argument can in fact be applied to
the more general case where the alphabet is large (even infinite), but only
four letters are allowed for each position.
     More formally, consider an infinite alphabet S and some k-list assign-
ment, i.e., a function α : N → P(S) that for every n ∈ N specifies which
k letters from S are allowed in n-th position (so |α(n)| = k). We say that
a sequence w0 w1 . . . respects α if wi ∈ α(i) for all i. In 2011, Grytczuk,
Przybylo and Zhu [7] proved that for any 4-list assignment L there exists
an infinite square-free sequence that respects L; several other proofs using
different tools appeared later (see Section 9). Recently a computable version
of this result was proven by Mourad [3] but only for 6-list assignments. In
this section we note that these results are easy corollaries of the game and
get the computable version for 4-lists as a byproduct (thus improving a bit
the result from [3]).
Theorem 5. For every 4-list assignment α there exists an infinite square-
free sequence that respects α. If the assignment is computable, then there
exists a computable square-free sequence that respects α.
Proof. We consider the game over the 4-ary tree that describes which letters
can be added at each step according to α. Every vertex at level d has 4 chil-
dren labeled with letters in α(d). Vertices of this tree correspond to S-words
that satisfy α-restrictions, and infinite paths are sequences respecting α.
    Consider the following strategy for Alice. When Bob’s position is some
word w, she forbids all the vertices corresponding to words wv for all v
that are non-empty suffixes of w (thus preventing vv from appearing in the
sequence). In this way every possible non-empty square will be forbidden
by Alice at the moment when the first half of this square appears.
    To show that Bob has a winning strategy, let β = 2. The β-weight of
Alice’s move is at most
                                1 1
                                  + + ... < 1
                                2 4
since Alice forbids at most one string of each positive length. For ω = 1 the
conditions of Theorems 1 and 2 are fulfilled; indeed, 2(1 + 1) ⩽ 4.

Remark 1. In our setting for every position there are four letters allowed in
this position. The same argument can be applied if the set of four allowed

                                      5
letters depends on the previous letters and not only of the height of the
vertex (i.e., when we consider a 4-ary tree whose edges are labeled by letters
from S).
    Note that after n steps there are at most O(n2 ) forbidden vertices in the
current subtree, and they can easily be found in polynomial time in n as
long as the list of each position can be computed in polynomial time. Under
this condition, the square-free sequence that respects the list assignment can
be computed in polynomial (in n) time.


5    Separated occurrences
The following result proven by Mourad [3] is a computable version of a
result of Beck [8] that was the historically first application of the Lovász
Local Lemma to sequences. It can be seen as a generalization of Thue’s
result: now two occurrences of the same string not only cannot follow each
other, but have to be far apart.

Theorem 6 ([3]). For every c < 2 there exist a constant N and a computable
infinite binary sequence α such that for every string x of length n ⩾ N any
two occurrences of x in α are far away: the distance between them is at
least cn .

    The distance between two occurrences starting at positions i and j is
defined as |i − j|. Note that c cannot be greater than 2 since then we require
more than 2n substrings of length n to be different.

Proof of Theorem 6. This result is also an easy application of the combina-
torial game of Section 2. Bob constructs α bit by bit, and Alice does not
allow α to violate the statement of the theorem. Namely, if x is a substring
already present in α (not too long ago), Alice prevents x from appearing
again (starting from the current position).
                                               n
                            x
                                                 x
                            n
                               ⩽ cn
In this way each move of Alice forbids at most cn vertices of level n (for all
n ⩾ N ), and we know that Bob can win if
                                         
                                   X cn
                          β 1 +          ⩽2
                                       βn
                                   n⩾N




                                      6
for some β ∈ (1, 2). Note that this condition is satisfied if β is chosen
arbitrarily in (c, 2), and N is large enough (so the tail of the geometric
series is small).
    This would finish the proof if not one minor problem that needs to be
dealt with: the distance between two potential occurrences of x may be
small and Alice does not have at hand the string that she needs to prevent
(the end of this string is not determined yet).
                                                   x

                                               x

    Still she can reconstruct the string to be avoided: choosing some bit in
the right occurrence of x, she already knows the corresponding bit in the
left occurrence (either it was in the already constructed part of α, or it was
already chosen previously in the context of right occurrence).

    If we want to know how N depends on c, we need to choose the optimal
value of β that makes the left hand side of the inequality minimal. Note
also that, as in the previous section, the result holds for the list setting and
even if the lists are chosen by Alice dynamically.
    In this case, every forbidden vertex is uniquely determined by 3 positions
from the current word (the start and end of the first occurrence of x, and the
start of the second occurrence of x). So the number of forbidden vertices in
the current subtree is bounded by a polynomial in the number of steps. We
may assume without loss of generality that c is a rational number (it can be
increased if necessary), so the n-bit prefix of the sequence we construct can
be computed polynomially (in n).


6    Making adjacent blocks very different
Mourad also considered another computable generalization of Thue’s result
(non-computable version was first mentioned as an exercise in [9]).

Theorem 7 ([3]). For any ε > 0, there is some N and a computable infinite
binary sequence α such that any two adjacent blocks in α of length n ⩾ N
differ in at least (1/2 − ε)n places.

    In the previous section we required two blocks to be different if they are
not very far apart; now we consider two adjacent blocks but require them
to be “very different”. We provide a simple proof of this result based on our
combinatorial game.

Proof of Theorem 7. First we note that the fraction of n-bit strings where
frequency of ones is less than 1/2 − ε is exponentially small (Chernoff’s
bound). So the number of n-bit strings that differ from a given string x in


                                       7
less than (1/2 − ε)n places is bounded by cn , where c < 2 is some constant
(depending on ε).
    Again Bob constructs α bit by bit and Alice forbids the undesirable
continuations. If Bob’s position corresponds to a word w, then for all suffixes
v of w of length n ⩾ N Alice forbids not only the extension v but all v ′ of
length n that differ from v in less than (1/2 − ε)n places (there are at most
cn of them). Bob can win if
                                           
                                     X cn
                            β 1 +          ⩽2
                                         βn
                                    n⩾N

and again for arbitrary β ∈ (c, 2) it happens for sufficiently large N .

     This result is a corollary of Miller’s theorem (Theorem 3): we forbid all
the factors vv ′ where v is long enough and v ′ is close to v, and there are not
many of them. But the game argument gives a bit more: it shows that the
result holds also in the list setting, even if the lists are chosen at the last
moment by Alice. It gives also a better bound on N (as function of ε) since
now we specify the forbidden extensions later (when the first half is already
known).
     Note that Alice adds exponentially many forbidden vertices at every step,
so this algorithm does not imply immediately the existence of a polynomial
time computable sequence with desired property. However, this can be easily
fixed: the number of strings that differ from a given string at most by a given
distance is a sum of (polynomially many) binomial coefficients and can be
easily computed. The distribution of these strings between children is also
easy to compute (since the condition is again about distance). The only
problem appears because the same string can be prohibited many times —
to avoid this problem, we may consider the multiset of forbidden strings and
compute the β-weights accordingly.
     The game technique can be applied to other questions related to word
combinatorics and repetitions; it seems that many results about sequences
obtained by the entropy compression technique (e.g. [6, 10, 11]), the power
series method (e.g. [12, 13, 14]) and the counting argument (e.g., [15]) can
be proven using the game technique with the same bounds, but with the
added benefit of computability (and simpler proofs). On the other hand,
it is unclear whether the variant of the counting argument used in [16, 17]
can be replaced by a game argument (it is also unclear whether the entropy-
compression technique can be used in that case).


7    Application to denominators
In this section we apply the combinatorial game described in Section 2 to
a number-theoretic question and consider rational approximations with re-

                                       8
stricted denominators, giving a new proof of results from [3, 2] (we also
slightly improve the bounds from both papers and provide a computable
version of the result that appeared in [3]).
    Let θ be some real number. To find its best rational approximation with
a given (positive integer) denominator t, we multiply θ by t and take the
closest integer. The “quality” of approximation can be measured by d(tθ, Z),
the distance between tθ and the nearest integer. This distance is a number
between 0 (ideal approximation) and 1/2 (the worst case). We will prove
that for every sparse enough set of denominators there exists a real number
that is hard to approximate using denominators from this set, and that this
number can be made computable if the set of denominators is computable.
    We will use the following terminology: a real θ is ε-regular for denom-
inator t if d(tθ, Z) > ε. Here ε > 0 is some threshold, and t is a positive
integer; this condition means that θ is “not too easy to approximate with
denominator t”. Assume that a sparse set T of positive integers (allowed
denominators) is given. By sparsity we mean that that for every j there are
only O(1) integers between 2j and 2j+1 that belong to T . Then there exists
some real θ and some positive ε such that θ is ε-regular for all denominators
t ∈ T . This question (in a slightly different form, see Section 9) was first
raised by Erdős [1].
    Let us start with some simple remarks. Obviously for a given t and for
every ε < 1/2 there are reals that are ε-regular for t. Moreover, for small ε
most reals are ε-regular for t: the reals that are not ε-regular for t, form
stripes around k/t (for integer values of k) of width 2ε/t (going ε/t left and
ε/t right). Those stripes cover 2ε-fraction of all points.
                                        1
                                        t
                          k                         k+1
                          t                          t

                         ± εt         1−2ε
                                        t
                                                    ± εt

The union bound then allows us to prove the existence of a real that is
ε-regular with respect to several denominators t1 , . . . , tk , assuming that
2kε < 1.
    This argument is not enough to construct a number that is ε-regular for
infinitely many denominators (and some fixed ε). And indeed it is not possi-
ble if T contains all integers: the Dirichlet theorem says that for every ε > 0
there is no real θ that is ε-regular for all denominators. (Indeed, consider
the sequence nθ (mod 1) and find two points n1 θ and n2 θ that are ε-close;
then t = n2 −n1 is a denominator that provides a good approximation, since
tθ is ε-close to 0.) This is why sparsity is needed. Informally speaking, it
guarantees that the fragmentation happens on different levels: stripe pat-
terns for small and large values of t are (almost) independent, similar to the
Lovász local lemma (though it is not true literally: e.g., stripes for t are not
independent with stripes for 2t). We utilize this structure and construct a

                                       9
decreasing sequence of dyadic intervals whose common point is ε-regular for
every t ∈ T . Here is the exact statement.

Theorem 8. Let T be a set of positive real numbers such that

                              |T ∩ (2j , 2j+1 ]| ⩽ C

for all integers j and some constant C. Assume that for some k ⩾ 3 there
exists β ∈ (1, 2) such that
                                   3C
                              β + k−1 ⩽ 2 .                          (∗)
                                  β
Then there exists a real θ ∈ [0, 1] that is 2−k -regular with respect to all
t ∈ T . Moreover, if T is computable then there exists a computable θ with
this property.

    Note that for large k we can find β that satisfies (∗); moreover, for every
β ∈ (1, 2) all sufficiently large k satisfy this inequality. So indeed for every T
that contains at most O(1) elements in every interval (2j , 2j+1 ] we can find
some ε > 0 and a real θ that is ε-regular with respect to all denominators
t ∈ T . (To find how ε depends on C, we should optimize the choice of β,
see Theorem 10 below.)

Proof of Theorem    8. For any ℓ, an ℓ-dyadic interval is an interval of the
form 2uℓ , u+1
               
            2ℓ
                 where   u is an integer. We consider a tree formed by dyadic
intervals inside [0, 1]. The root of this tree is the 0-dyadic interval [0, 1], and
each vertex has two children (left and right half). An infinite branch in this
tree is a sequence of nested dyadic intervals, and we will construct θ as the
(unique) common point of such a sequence for a suitable chosen branch.
    Let us split all the denominators we care about into groups:

                          Pj = {t ∈ T : 2j < t ⩽ 2j+1 }

Here j ⩾ −1 is an integer (for j = −1 only 1 can be in Pj ). By assumption
|Pj | ⩽ C for all j. At every step of the construction we consider one group
of denominators. Let us say that an ℓ-diadic interval I is valid if each of
its point is 2−k -regular for all denominators t ∈ Pℓ−k . Note that ℓ − k is
negative for small ℓ and the group Pℓ−k may be undefined; in this case all
ℓ-diadic intervals are valid. (We will see later how this shift by k helps.)
     We consider the game between Alice and Bob. When Bob is at level m
of the tree, Alice forbids all the vertices of level m + k − 2 that correspond
to invalid dyadic intervals. (Again, we will see later why k − 2 helps; note
that according to our conventions we use denominators from Pm−2 to define
valid intervals of level m + k − 2.)




                                        10
                         m+k−2

                                     m



Lemma 1. At each step Alice forbids at most 3C vertices.
Proof. Vertices are prohibited at step m because the corresponding interval
at level m + k − 2 is not valid, i.e., contains some point that is close to
a fraction with denominator in Pm−2 . There are only C denominators in
Pm−2 , so it is enough to show that each denominator causes at most 3
forbidden intervals. We need to show that the “bad stripes” of width 2ε/t
(where ε = 2−k ) separated by gaps of length (1−2ε)/t may intersect at most
3 dyadic intervals of level m + k − 2 that are parts of the dyadic interval at
level m (corresponding to the current position of Bob).
    Consider some denominator t in Pm−2 , so 2m−2 < t ⩽ 2m−1 . The
distance between two bad stripes is (1 − 2ε)/t. Since k ⩾ 3, we have ε =
2−k ⩽ 1/8; recalling that t ⩽ 2m−1 we see that the distance is bigger that
2−m (the length of an m-dyadic interval):
                             1 − 2ε      3/4     1
                                    ⩾ m−1 > m .
                                t      2        2
Therefore only one stripe matters, and we need to check that it may intersect
at most three (m + k − 2)-dyadic intervals. For that it is enough to show
that the width of the stripe is less than two times the length of the interval
(if the stripe touches four intervals, it necessarily contains two),


and indeed
                2ε  2−k+1
                   < m−2 = 2−k−m+3 = 2 · 2−(m+k−2) .
                 t   2
Lemma 1 is proven.
   Now we combine the Lemma and the criterion from Theorem 1 and
show that Bob can win the game. Indeed, Alice forbids 3C vertices, each
has weight 1/β k−2 , so the inequality from Theorem 1 requires that
                                         
                                      3C
                              β 1 + k−2 ⩽ 2,
                                     β
and that is what is guaranteed by the condition.
    Note that at step n we have chosen n bits of θ and consider denominators
that are O(2n ). Since we add at most 3C forbidden vertices at every step, the
set of forbidden vertices and its weight can be computed in time polynomial
in n (given the list of denominators as an oracle). So the n-th bit in the
binary expansion of θ is polynomialy (in n) computable with the same oracle.

                                     11
8    Optimizing the choice of parameters
The parameter β does not appear in the claim of Theorem 8, so for given C
and k we may choose β that makes the left hand side of the inequality (i.e.,
β + 3C/β k−1 ) minimal and verify that this minimal value does not exceed 2.
This minimal value is easy to find; for example, we may split β into a sum
of k − 1 terms β/(k − 1) and note that we minimize the sum of k quantities
whose product is constant, so the minimal value is achieved when all the
terms are equal:
                                 β       3C
                                     = k−1 .
                              k−1       β
This gives 3C(k − 1) = β k , or β = (3C(k − 1))1/k , and the minimal value is
                        k      k
                           β=     (3C(k − 1))1/k .
                       k−1    k−1
It does not exceed 2 when
                   k                    k−1
                 k                      k
                       · 3C(k − 1) =            · 3Ck ⩽ 2k .
               k−1                     k−1

The first factor is an approximation (from below) to e = 2.71828 . . ., so we
get the following version of Theorem 8 where β is eliminated:

Theorem 9. Let T be a set of positive integers such that

                             |T ∩ (2j , 2j+1 ]| ⩽ C

for all integers j and some constant C. Assume that for some k ⩾ 3 the
inequality
                               3eCk ⩽ 2k
holds. Then there exists a real θ ∈ [0, 1] that is 2−k -regular with respect to
all t ∈ T . Moreover, if T is computable then there exists a computable θ
with this property.

    For example, for C = 1 (minimal possible value) we may take k = 6 and
conclude that there exists a real that is (1/64)-regular with respect to all
t ∈ T . For bigger values of C we should take the minimal value of k that fits
the condition of Theorem 9; it guarantees the existence of a ε(C)-regular θ
with respect to all denominators in T for ε(C) = 2−k(C) . Asymptotically
(as C → ∞) this value is
                                           1
                         ε(C) =
                                  (3e + o(1))C log2 C
Indeed,
              k(C) ≈ log2 (3eCk(C)) = log2 (3eC) + log2 k(C),

                                      12
so
               k(C) = (1 + o(1)) log2 (3eC) = (1 + o(1)) log2 C
and
               log2 k(C) = log2 (3eC) + log2 ((1 + o(1)) log2 C).
If we want a bound that is valid for all C ⩾ 2, one can estimate the values
of the parameters for small C and see that
                                           1
                              θ(C) =
                                       64C log2 C
is enough (here we use 64 instead of the asymptotic value 3e = 8.15 . . .).
This gives the following corollary:
Theorem 10. Let C ⩾ 2 be an integer and let T be a [computable] set of
positive integers that contains at most C elements in every interval (2j , 2j+1 ].
Then there exists a [computable] real θ that is 1/(64C log2 C)-regular for all
t ∈ T.
     This result slightly improves the bound from [2] and its computable
version in [3]. Moreover, if we can compute in time polynomial in n the n
first bits of the n first elements of T , then we can compute in time polynomial
in n the n first bits of θ.


9     Historical remarks
9.1    Erdős’ question
The original formulation of Erdős’ question in [1, p. 96] was: “Finally I state
a few disconnected problems. Let n1 < n2 < . . . be an infinite sequence of
integers satisfying nk+1 /nk > c > 1. Is it true that there always is an
irrational α for which the sequence (nk α) is not everywhere dense?” (The
parentheses in (nk α) mean that the sequence is considered modulo 1.) Note
that Erdős’ asks this sequence not to be dense, and we discuss a bit stronger
requirement: the sequence is never ε-close to 0.
    Another difference is that the condition for the denominators is stronger:
Erdős requires that nk+1 /nk > c for some c > 1 while we use only that each
interval (s, 2s] contains O(1) denominators.
    There was a sequence of improvements related to Erdős’ question that
is summarized by Peres and Schlag [2]: first bounds of Mathan (1980) and
Pollington (1979) had O(C 4 log C) in the denominator; Katznelson (2001)
improved the bound replacing the denominator by O(C 2 log C); then Akhun-
zhanov and Moshchevitin (2004) got O(C 2 ) (no logarithmic factor), and such
a bound with better explicit constant was also obtained by Dubickas (2006).
Peres and Schlag [2] provide O(C log C) bound; Mourad used additional
ideas to get the computable version (though with slightly worse constant

                                       13
1/360 instead of 1/240 by Peres and Schlag). Our constant 1/64 is approxi-
mately five times better. As explained by Peres and Schlag, it is not possible
to do better than Ω(C), but it is still open whether the log n term can be
removed.

9.2   Forbidden factors
The questions about forbidden factors appeared several times from differ-
ent perspectives (algebra, computer science, combinatorics on words). From
the computer science perspective the story goes as follows. Leonid Levin
noted long ago that there exist an everywhere complex sequence, a bit se-
quence such the every its n-bit substring has Kolmogorov complexity at
least 0.99n − O(1). (Here 0.99 can be replaced by any constant smaller
than 1.) Levin proved this result using Kolmogorov complexity (this proof
is reproduced in [18]). This result can be translated into a combinatorial
language as follows: if for every n we declare at most 20.99n strings as “for-
bidden”, there exists a constant c and an infinite sequence that does not
contain forbidden strings of length greater than c. (See [19, section 8.5,
p. 241] for details.) It was noted by Rumyantsev and Ushakov [20] that
one can prove this combinatorial statement using Lovász local lemma (LLL)
and this argument can be generalized to the multidimensional case (where
the original complexity argument by Levin does not work): there exists a
2-dimensional bit configuration where every rectangle has almost maximal
complexity. Rumyantsev [21] used this technique (Kolmogorov complexity
and Lovász local lemma) for word combinatorics (construction of a sequence
with given critical exponent). Miller [4] gave a much more precise condition
for the existence of a sequence that avoids a given set of forbidden strings (re-
produced above as Theorem 3) that can be easily applied to the computable
case — unlike LLL that (in its natural form) uses König’s lemma that dis-
rupts computability. However, after the Moser–Tardos effective proof of the
Lovász local lemma was discovered, Fortnow suggested to look for an infi-
nite computable version of the LLL, and indeed Rumyantsev found such a
version [22, 23]. The Moser–Tardos proof used some compressibility argu-
ment that can be transformed into a compressibility argument for Miller’s
criterion (see [24, 25] for details and references) with exactly the same condi-
tion. This looks quite mysterious (why exactly the same condition appears
in two completely different arguments) — moreover, a closely related condi-
tion appeared much earlier (1964) in algebraic context (Golod–Shafarevich
theorem, see [25, Appendix] for details), and reappeared in the counting
argument that reproves Miller’s result and was found by the first author,
see [26]. The latter argument was also used in [16] where the first author of
this note gave another proof of this result based on a new counting argument
which also implies that the numbers of square-free words of length n that
respect the 4-list assignment grows exponentially with n.


                                       14
    Note also that different modification of LLL (and its computable ver-
sions) were also used to prove results about square-free words and Erdős
question. In particular, Pegden in 2011 introduced his Left-handed Lovász
Local Lemma to study nonrepetitive games (one player wants to avoid
squares or other repetitions while the other want to create them, and they
alternate in adding letters to a string) [27]. In 2013, Grytczuk, Kozik and
Micek used another proof of this result based on the so-called entropy com-
pression technique, which also implies that there is an efficient algorithm to
construct finite square-free words respecting L [6].


Acknowledgement
The first author would like to thank Yann Bugeaud for motivating this
research by asking whether the counting argument introduced in [26] could
be applied to the lacunary sequence problem. The answer is yes, but the
current argument yields identical bounds and provide a computable result.
    This research was funded in part by the French National Research Agency
(ANR) under the projects ANR-24-CE48-3758-01 and ANR-21-CE48-0023.


References
 [1] Paul Erdős. Repartition Modulo 1. Lecture Notes in Math., 475, 1975.

 [2] Yuval Peres and Wilhelm Schlag. Two Erdős problems on lacunary
     sequences: Chromatic number and Diophantine approximation. Bull.
     London Math. Soc., 42(2):295–300, April 2010.

 [3] Daniel Mourad. Computing Non-Repetitive Sequences with a Com-
     putable Lefthanded Local Lemma. arXiv, June 2024.

 [4] Joseph S. Miller. Two notes on subshifts. Proceedings of the American
     Mathematical Society, 140(5):1617–1622, 2012.

 [5] Axel Thue. Über unendliche Zeichenreihen. Norske Vid. Selsk. Skr. I.
     Mat. Nat. Kl. Christiania, 7:1–22, 1906.

 [6] Jaroslaw Grytczuk, Jakub Kozik, and Piotr Micek. New approach to
     nonrepetitive sequences. Random Structures Algorithms, 42(2):214–
     225, March 2013.

 [7] Jaroslaw Grytczuk, Jakub Przybylo, and Xuding Zhu. Nonrepetitive
     list colourings of paths. Random Structures Algorithms, 38(1-2):162–
     173, January 2011.




                                     15
 [8] József Beck. An application of Lovász local lemma: there exists an
     infinite 01-sequence containing no near identical intervals. In Finite
     and Infinite Sets, pages 103–107. North-Holland, January 1984.
 [9] Noga Alon, Joel H Spencer, and Paul Erdős. The Probabilistic Method.
     John Wiley & Sons, 1992.
[10] Pascal Ochem and Alexandre Pinlou. Application of Entropy Com-
     pression in Pattern Avoidance. Electron. J. Combin., page P2.7, April
     2014.
[11] Joanna Chybowska-Sokól, Michal Debski, Jaroslaw Grytczuk, Kon-
     stanty Junosza-Szaniawski, Barbara Nayar, Urszula Pastwa, and
     Krzysztof Wesek. Fractional meanings of nonrepetitiveness. J. Combin.
     Theory Ser. A, 189:105598, July 2022.
[12] Jason P. Bell and Teow Lim Goh. Exponential lower bounds for the
     number of words of uniform length avoiding a pattern. Inform. And
     Comput., 205(9):1295–1306, September 2007.
[13] Narad Rampersad. Further Applications of a Power Series Method for
     Pattern Avoidance. Electron. J. Combin., page P134, June 2011.
[14] Pascal Ochem. Doubled Patterns are 3-Avoidable. Electron. J. Com-
     bin., page P1.19, February 2016.
[15] Matthieu Rosenfeld. Lower-Bounds on the Growth of Power-Free Lan-
     guages Over Large Alphabets. Theory Comput. Syst., 65(7):1110–1116,
     October 2021.
[16] Matthieu Rosenfeld. Avoiding squares over words with lists of size three
     amongst four symbols. Math. Comput., 91(337):2489–2500, September
     2022.
[17] Matthieu Rosenfeld. Ann wins the nonrepetitive game over four let-
     ters and the erase-repetition game over six letters. Eur. J. Combin.,
     118:103924, May 2024.
[18] Bruno Durand, Leonid A. Levin, and Alexander Shen. Complex tilings.
     Journal of Symbolic Logic, 73(2):593–613, 2008.
[19] Alexander Shen, Vladimir A. Uspensky, and Nikolay Vereshchagin. Kol-
     mogorov Complexity and Algorithmic Randomness. Mathematical Sur-
     veys and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, 2017.
[20] Andrey Yu. Rumyantsev and Maxim A. Ushakov. Forbidden substrings,
     kolmogorov complexity and almost periodic sequences. In Bruno Du-
     rand and Wolfgang Thomas, editors, STACS 2006, 23rd Annual Sym-
     posium on Theoretical Aspects of Computer Science, Marseille, France,

                                     16
    February 23-25, 2006, Proceedings, volume 3884 of Lecture Notes in
    Computer Science, pages 396–407. Springer, 2006.

[21] Andrey Yu. Rumyantsev. Kolmogorov complexity, lovász local lemma
     and critical exponents. In Volker Diekert, Mikhail V. Volkov, and An-
     drei Voronkov, editors, Computer Science - Theory and Applications,
     Second International Symposium on Computer Science in Russia, CSR
     2007, Ekaterinburg, Russia, September 3-7, 2007, Proceedings, volume
     4649 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 349–355. Springer,
     2007.

[22] Andrei Yu. Rumyantsev and Alexander Shen. Probabilistic construc-
     tions of computable objects and a computable version of lovász local
     lemma. CoRR, abs/1305.1535, 2013.

[23] Andrei Yu. Rumyantsev and Alexander Shen. Probabilistic construc-
     tions of computable objects and a computable version of lovász local
     lemma. Fundam. Informaticae, 132(1):1–14, 2014.

[24] Alexander Shen. Compressibility and probabilistic proofs. In Jarkko
     Kari, Florin Manea, and Ion Petre, editors, Unveiling Dynamics and
     Complexity - 13th Conference on Computability in Europe, CiE 2017,
     Turku, Finland, June 12-16, 2017, Proceedings, volume 10307 of Lecture
     Notes in Computer Science, pages 101–111. Springer, 2017.

[25] Alexander Shen. Compressibility and probabilistic proofs.      CoRR,
     abs/1703.03342, 2017.

[26] Matthieu Rosenfeld. Another Approach to Non-Repetitive Colorings of
     Graphs of Bounded Degree. Electron. J. Combin., page P3.43, Septem-
     ber 2020.

[27] Wesley Pegden. Highly nonrepetitive sequences: Winning strategies
     from the local lemma. Random Structures Algorithms, 38(1-2):140–161,
     January 2011.




                                    17
