th
4                                                                                                 2



    =




                         ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS                         AND
                              THE THEORY OF GROUPS*                                               3


                               HARALD     BOHR,    University of Copenhagen

            1. Introduction. The subject which I have chosen for my lecture, the theory
        of the almost periodic functions, has gradually been increased to a comprehen-
        sive and extensive theory by the contributions of numerous mathematicians in
        various countries. Therefore it would be a rather impossible task to try to give
        in a single lecture even a very cursory survey of the many different problems
        which have been taken up for treatment within the scope of this theory and its
        generalizations. The task, then, which I have set myself today is less compre-
        hensive. First I shall try to describe quite briefly what might be called the main
        problem of the theory, confining myself however to the consideration of func-
        tions of a real variable, and to explain some especially important features of its
        solution. Subsequently I shall explain to you in a few words how this main
        problem could later on be fitted into a much wider class of problems than was
        originally the case, that is to say, that it could be considered as a problem in the
        so-called theory of groups. The points of view which led to this extension were
        first emphasized by Weyl, whereas the accomplishment of the group theoretical
        treatment is due to von Neumann.
            2. Periodic functions. Before I begin to speak about the almost periodic
        functions it will be natural and convenient to say first a few words about the
        theory of the purely periodic functions. We shall start with a very simple, but
        at the same time very general notion, namely, a quite arbitrary periodic con-
        tinuous motion in the plane. Let ¢ denote the time, and let us use complex
        numbers w=x-+iv to characterize the points of the plane. Then this motion can
        be represented by an equation

                                        w= w(t) = u(t) + ivf),
        where w(t) is a continuous complex function for — © <t< ©, periodic with a
        period p. Such a motion can of course be extremely complicated. Among these
        motions the most primitive one is certainly a uniform motion on a circle, for
        instance with its centre at the origin. Such a motion may be represented by the
        equation
                                                  w=
        where a is acomplex constant and Xa            real number. Let a=re*. Then r indicates
        the radius of the circle, and \ is the angular velocity, so that the period is
        2n/ |r| , whereas @ indicates the phase, 7.e., determines where on the circle the
        point is to be found at the time ¢=0. Such a uniform circular motion, repre-
        sented by w=ae**, will be called a pure oscillation. For the present, we
        shall consider only those pure oscillations which have a given number p as one

           * Rouse Ball Lecture, delivered in Cambridge, England, in May, 1946.

                                                       595
      596    ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY OF GROUPS             [November,    1

      of their periods; let us call them mutually harmonic. If for the sake of conven-
      ience we choose p=2r, the circular motions selected in this manner are just the
      ones represented by a,e*"‘, where      is an arbitrary integer and a, is a complex
      constant. Combining an arbitrary finite number of such simple circular mo-
      tions with the period 27, i.e., considering an exponential polynomial s(#) of the
      form
                    s(t) = ao +        + a_yem#t   +               +

      we get of course again a continuous periodic motion of period 27, which may,
      however, look very complicated. Such motions, produced by so-called super-
      position of mutually harmonic oscillations were, as is well known, not un-
      familiar even to ancient Greek astronomers. Of every motion produced in this
      way we shall say that it can be decomposed into mutually harmonic pure oscil-
      lations. But we shall extend the meaning of this notion somewhat further, it be-
      ing convenient to operate not only with finite sums, but also with infinite sums,
      that is to say, also to involve a limit transition. We shall here consider only a
      limit process uniform for all ¢, as the simplest possible limit transition. Thus
      more generally we shall say about a function w(t) that it can be decomposed into
      mutually harmonic oscillations, if the function can be represented as the result
      of a uniform limit transition on finite sums of the kind in question. From the
ae.   point of view of pure mathematics as well as of the applications, it is evidently a
      problem of decisive importance to find out which continuous periodic motions
      with the period 27 may in this way be composed of uniform circular motions. As
      is well known, this problem was solved by Weierstrass in his famous theorem
      that every continuous motion which is periodic with the period 27 allows such
      a decomposition. In other words any quite arbitrary continuous periodic motion
      with the period 27 can be approximated for all ¢ by one of our polynomials s(t)
      with an arbitrarily given degree of approximation. This being the case, the
      question naturally arises as to the intensity and phase with which a definite
      one of our oscillations e*** occurs in the arbitrary motion w=w(t) under con-
      sideration. That is, what value does the coefficient of e* assume? Evidently
      the coefficients of the single terms of the approximating polynomial s(t) cannot
      be fixed exactly before we have gone to the limit, 7.e., as long as we only con-
      sider a polynomial s(#) approximating w(t) with a certain degree. However, s,(t)
      being a sequence of polynomials which for vy              converges uniformly to the
      given function w(t), the coefficient a? with which the oscillation e** occurs in the
      polynomial s,(¢) will for every fixed m converge to a definite value Ap. This
      number A, is called the mth Fourier coefficient of the function, and it may be
      said to indicate the intensity and phase with which the corresponding oscilla-
      tion e** occurs in the given motion w(t). This mth Fourier coefficient A, is de-
      termined by
                                       An = M{              ,
                                                                                             ‘

      where At{w(t)e-i"*}    denotes   the mean        value (1/2) [2*w(t)e-dt. There is
    1949]    ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY OF GROUPS                 597

    another way, namely, by a more formal consideration, by which we may im-
    mediately arrive at these expressions for the Fourier coefficients. Let us write
    formally w(¢) as an infinite series                                                   :




                                     w(t) =


    and make use of the fact that the system of functions e** forms a normalized
    orthogonal system in the sense that for any two arbitrary functions $(t) =e™*
    and y(t)      of the system



                                                      1   for   nN, =


y
§   Then, by multiplying our infinite series by e~*"* and integrating term by term
    we get just the expression given above for the coefficient A, of e**. We have
    indicated above how, starting from Weierstrass’ approximation theorem and by
    performing the limit transition, we were led to the Fourier coefficients and thus
    to the Fourier series of the function w(t). Conversely, however, we can prove
    Weierstrass’ approximation theorem starting from the formally formed Fourier
    series of the function w(t). Indeed, the exponential polynomials which are                aig

    directly determined by the partial sums )-”,, A,e* of the Fourier series cannot
    always be used as uniform approximation sums; these partial sums do, it is
    true, in a certain sense approximate the function best, namely in the so-called
    mean, but not uniformly, as we claim here; however, starting from the Fourier
    series we may in different ways by various so-called summation methods form
    finite sums Sy(t) which for N—>© converge uniformly to the given function
    w(t). From the mere fact that it is possible from the Fourier series of the func-
    tion w(t) to determine, 7.e., to come back to the function w(t), we see in particu-
    lar that the function w(#) is uniquely determined by its Fourier series, 7.e., that
    two different continuous periodic functions cannot have one and the same
    Fourier series. This fundamental theorem, the so-called uniqueness theorem, can
    also be formulated in the following way: The function w(t) identically 0 is the
$
    only function the Fourier constants of which vanish altogether; consequently
    there does not exist any function w(t) which may be added to the system e*‘ so
    that the extended system again becomes a normalized orthogonal system. This
    is expressed by saying that the system e*"* is a complete normalized orthogonal
    system.
       3. Almost periodic functions.      I have dwelt at comparative length on the
    theory of the continuous purely periodic functions and the theory of their
    Fourier series, and adapted my remarks about them, in order to be able to
    speak all the more briefly of the corresponding more general theory of the al-
    most periodic functions. Just as before, we start our discussion of the general
    598    ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY OF GROUPS          [November,

    theory by considering the simple pure oscillations
                                        w= — ae,

    but now we include all of them in our considerations, 7.e., we do not select a
    simple mutually harmonic system by considering only those oscillations which
    have a given period. This gives from the very beginning an essentially different
    situation in view of the fact that the total number of pure oscillations has the
    power of the continuum whereas there exists only a denumerable number of pure
    oscillations with a given period. As before, so also here, we consider all finite
    sums of our pure oscillations, 7.e., all exponential polynomials of the form
                                     s(t) =    ane
    where now, however, the exponents \, may be quite arbitrary real numbers
    and not all of them multiples of one and the same number as before. As formerly,
    we are interested in the continuous motion which is determined by the function
    w=s(t). A principal difference, though, is that in this case the composed motion
    is no longer periodic; certainly the single components a,e‘ are still periodic, but
    in general they will have no common period, since the exponents may be
    incommensurable. However, as pointed out by Bohl, who in some very interest-
    ing papers studied some classes of continuous functions which include the peri-
    odic functions and are contained in the more general class of the almost periodic
    functions, the motion described by w=s(t) must at any rate present certain
    periodic-like features, namely, for every e>0 there is an infinite number of so-
    called almost periods or translations numbers 7(e). By a translation number
    7(€) we understand a number 7 which for all ¢ satisfies the inequality
                                  | w(t + 7) — w(t)| Se.
          In the study of the general class of motions which may be decomposed into
    a finite or infinite number of pure oscillations the first important problem is, of
    course, to find the theorem analogous to Weierstrass’ theorem concerning the spe-
    cial case of mutually harmonic oscillations e‘. To put it more exactly, we ask
    in analogy with the former case: Which continuous motions w=w(t) may be
    represented either by finite sums of pure oscillations or may be uniformly ap-
    proached by such sums. Evidently these motions need not be periodic, but they
    are far from being quite arbitrary, since they must certainly present some peri-
    odic-like features. The exact solution of the problem is that the function w(t)
    should be what I have called an almost periodic function. The definition of such a
    function reads: A function f(t) continuous for all ¢ is called almost periodic if,
    firstly, for any e>0 it possesses translation numbers r(e) in the sense defined
    above and if furthermore, the set of translation numbers belonging to a given
    ¢>0 is relatively dense, which means that there do not exist arbitrarily great
    intervals which are free from such translation numbers r(e).
        In view of the subsequent group theoretical investigations I should like to
    insert a remark about another way of characterizing the almost periodic func-


4
        1949]    ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY OF GROUPS                    599

        tions, a way which proves to be closely associated with the original definition
        given above. Already in my early investigations of almost periodic functions I
        had occasion to use the following theorem: Let f(x) be an almost periodic
        function and hy, fe, - - - an arbitrary sequence of real numbers. Consider the se-
        quence of functions f(x+4), f(x+42), - - - whose elements originate from the
        given almost periodic function f(x) by the corresponding translations of the in-
        dependent variable. Then we can always select a subsequence                         SO
f
        that the new sequence of functions f(x+h,,), f(x+hn,),                converges uni-
        formly on the whole x-axis. Later on Bochner found the interesting result that
        this theorem can be converted so that we have really a new characterization of
        the very notion of almost periodicity. This new definition reads in exact formu-
        lation: A function f(x) continuous for all x is called almost periodic, if from
        each sequence of functions f(x+/), f(x-+42),         formed from f(x) by transla-
        tions of the x-axis a sub-sequence may be selected which converges uniformly
        for all x. This may also be expressed by saying that the set of functions {f(x+h) }.
        — «© <h< _, formed from f(x) by all possible translations is compact.
            It is not very difficult to prove that every function w(t) which can be de-
        composed into pure oscillations, 7.e., can be approximated uniformly by ex-
        ponential polynomials s(t), is an almost periodic function. The essential difficulty
        lies in the proof of the converse, 7.e., that every almost periodic motion w(t) can
        be approximated uniformly by sums of pure oscillations. Here let me stress that
        the oscillations a,e»* which occur with no quite negligible coefficients in an ex-
        ponential sum s(t) which approximates the given function w(t) sufficiently closely
        must have exponents An, which, in contrast to the coefficients a,, have exactly
        determined values characteristic of the function w(t) in question. This is in-
        timately associated with the fact that while an oscillation ae™ is only slightly
        changed if the coefficient a is changed a little, the least change of the exponent
        \ means an essential change of the course of the oscillation, since we are inter-
        ested in this course for all times, 7.e., for — 0 <t< . In proving that an arbi-
        trary almost periodic function f(t) can really be approximated by finite sums of
        pure oscillations, we must therefore begin by finding a way to make the given
        almost periodic function f(#), so to speak, deliver as its oscillation exponents
        certain numbers A, characteristic of that function. This is obtained by connect-
        ing a Fourier series with the function, just as in the case of the periodic functions.
    ¥
        This Fourier series, however, has here the general form
                                                 Ane*Ant,                                        ie


        where the set of the exponents A,, characteristic of the function, may be any
                                                                                                      :
        enumerable set of real numbers and not just of integers. Thus, since the oscilla-
        tion exponents A, of an almost periodic function are first disclosed by its Fourier
        series, the Fourier series assumes, in a sense, a still more central position in the
        theory of the almost periodic functions than it does in the more restricted class of
        the purely periodic functions, where the exponents are given beforehand. In this
        lecture I am, of course, not able to go further into the structure of the theory,
                                                                                              |




        600     ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY OF GROUPS          [November,

                                                                                                   we
        but shall only say a few words about it. The starting point is that the total non-
        enumerable system of all pure oscillations e®‘, where \ runs over all real num-       |
        bers, forms a normalized orthogonal system, but now, of course, only if we
        consider the system on the whole ¢-axis; for, denoting by AC{f} the mean value        |    be
        over the infinite ¢-interval, namely,                                                      we
                                                                                                   inf
                                                1
                                          lim       J                                              Fc

                                                                                                   to
                                                                                              |    Fe
        we have                                                                                    tic
:                                                   0   for   Ai ¥ Ag,                             tic
                                                    1   for   Ai =   Ag.
                                                                                                   co
                                                                                                   fu
        Therefore, writing formally our given almost periodic function f(t) as an infinite         co
        sum of pure oscillations, that is,                                                             m
                                                                                                    tic

                                                                                                       th
                                                                                                       ne
        we can determine the coefficient A, of the oscillation e*4»* by a formal calcula-
        tion, quite analogous to that in the case of the purely periodic functions. Multi-
                                                                                                       ot
        plying tle equation by e~‘4»* ,and taking the mean value on both sides, we get
                                                                                                       of
                                        An =                                                      om   Pi
              However, this formal starting point must be seen from a point of view essen-             or
        tially different from that of the purely periodic case, where the exponents A,
        were numbers given beforehand and where the relation was only to serve to                      al
        determine the corresponding coefficients A,. In our case where we do not know                  in
        the exponents of the function but have to determine them, we proceed in the
        following way. For an arbitrary real \ we form the mean value
                                        M{ f(t)e-™*} = a(d).                                           p!
        The forming of this mean value may be interpreted as a question put to the
                                                                                                       ti
        function: Do you for the given \ contain the oscillation e®*? The result a(A) =0
        means that the function f(t) answers the question in the negative, whereas the
        answer a(A) ~0 means that the function admits that it contains the oscillation
        e®* in question, and with a coefficient the value of which is given by the number              o!
        a(A). Now it is relatively easy to show, and this result is a decisive point in the
        development of the theory, that the answer is negative for almost all values of
        A,     that a(A) =0 for all A apart from an enumerable set, say Aj, Az,
        These values of \ are called the Fourier exponents of the function, and the cor-
        responding mean values A, =a(A,) #0 are called the Fourier coefficients of the
    >   function. With these pairs of numbers A,, A, we form the infinite series DA ,e*4n¢
        called the Fourier series of the almost periodic function f(¢) in question. Thus               n
     |




         1949]    ON ALMOST   PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY        OF GROUPS         601


         we have obtained a first, important, though for the present, formal, starting
     |
         point of the theory.
             About the further deve!opment, leading up to the final result that f(#) can       i

         be approximated uniformly by finite exponential sums s(¢), I shall say only a few
         words. We have seen how to every almost periodic function f(#) is attached an
         infinite series 2A,e*4»* with real exponents A, and complex coefficients A,, the
         Fourier series of the function. It now becomes a question of decisive importance
         to ascertain whether conversely the function f(t) is uniquely determined by its
         Fourier series, or in other words, whether two different almost periodic func-
         tions always have two different Fourier series. We may also formulate this ques-
         tion in another way, and ask whether our normalized orthogonal system e is
         complete in the set of the almost periodic functions, 7.e., whether we may add a
         further almost periodic function to this system so that the extended system be-
         comes again a normalized orthogonal system. In a more vague formulation we
         may interpret the question in the following way: Can an almost periodic func-
         tion really be entirely decomposed into a denumerable number of pure oscilla-
         tions or does there remain an undecomposable remainder of the function after
         the pure oscillations given by the Fourier series have been removed? Fortu-
         nately the uniqueness theorem saying that every almost periodic function is
         entirely characterized by its Fourier series is valid. To prove this theorem or
         other theorems equivalent to it is the central, but also the most difficult point,
         of the theory. Several proofs exist, varying as to starting point and method. The
         most simple, and in a certain sense the most elementary one, is de la Vallée
         Poussin’s proof; it may be characterized as a considerable simplification of the
         original and rather complicated proof of the lecturer. Other proofs were given
         by Norbert Wiener in connection with his interesting general spectral theory
         and by Hermann Weyl. Weyl’s proof, based on an analogy with the theory of
         integral equations, has proved to be especially significant for the group-theo-
         retical generalization of the theory about which I shall speak in a moment.
             With the uniqueness theorem at our disposal, we may advance in various
         ways to obtain the main theorem of our theory, the theorem of the uniform ap-
         proximation   by exponential   polynomials   which   is the counterpart   and   the
         generalization of Weierstrass’ approximation theorem for purely periodic func-
         tions. The original proof, given by the lecturer, and generalizing a method of
         Bohl which was developed for an essentially more restricted class of functions,
         was based on a theory of Fourier series for the so-called limit-periodic functions
                                                                                               ?
         of an infinite number of variables. Later on, Bochner succeeded in showing that
         the approximating exponential sums s(¢) in question could also be obtained di-            =

         rectly from the Fourier series of the function f(¢) without the transition to func-
Ne       tions of an infinite number of variables. Other proofs of the approximation
         theorem were given by Weyl and Wiener among others. Among these proofs
         Wiener’s proof has turned out to be especially suitable for generalization. In
         one sense or the other all the different proofs may be regarded as summation
         methods, the application of which to the Fourier series of an almost periodic

és
fy              602     ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY OF GROUPS           [November,
                                                                                                            tl
                function produces finite sums s(#) which converge uniformly to the function.
                                                                                                            0}
                    Before I proceed to place the theory within the scope of the theory of groups,
                                                                                                            if
                I want briefly to mention that, like the classical theory of Fourier series of purely
                periodic functions, the theory of the Fourier series of the almost periodic func-
                tions has also been generalized in various ways by numerous mathematicians. Of
                special interest is a generalization due to Besicovitch, who succeeded in ob-
                taining a class of functions almost periodic in a generalized sense, the Fourier
                series of which may be characterized in an especially simple way, being
    E                                                                                                       nN
                just the series 2A,e*4 for which 2|A,|?       is convergent, while the A, may be
                quite arbitrary real numbers.
                                                                                                            f
                    4. The theory of almost periodic functions as a part of the theory of groups.
                In the remaining part of my lecture I shall try to describe briefly the points
                of view which made Weyl and von Neumann see the theory of the almost peri-
                odic functions (including in particular the classical theory of the purely periodic     |a
                functions) in a far more general light, 7.e., to see it as belonging within the gen-
                eral theory of groups.
                      We may start our considerations by observing what in the present connec-
                tion may be said to be the essential properties of the normalized orthogonal
                system in question, 7.e., the system of the pure oscillations e®*. These pure oscil-
                lations may, of course, be looked upon in different ways, but their main char-
                acteristics may be said to be that they satisfy the simple functional equation

                                              o(x + y) = $(x)-(y).
                As is well known, this functional equation has an infinite number of solutions,
                both continuous and discontinuous, the latter being of a rather unpleasant or
=           i
                abnormal character, in fact, not even measurable in the general sense of
                Lebesgue. As regards the continuous solutions, they simply consist of all func-
                tions e**, where a is an arbitrary complex constant. Selecting from among them
                only those for which the exponent a@ is a purely imaginary number 7A, we get
                only our pure oscillations e®*, which thus may be characterized as the bounded
                continuous solutions of the functional equation in question. However,        a func-         1
                tional equation of the type                                                                  1
        :
                                                                                                             (
                                                o(x + y) = o(x)-o(y)
                is also encountered in quite another discipline, namely, in the general theory of
                                                                                                             ‘
                groups, where the independent variable x, however, need not be a number, but
                may be a symbol of quite a different kind, whereas the values of the function           {
                                                                                                        \
                (x) are still ordinary complex numbers. Before going into details I must first say
                a few words about the general notion “abstract group” which plays such a
                                                                                                             ‘
                fundamental part in the mathematics of our day; this importance follows from
                                                                                                             1
                the fact that in the theory of groups many apparently quite different investiga-
                tions taken from numerous mathematical disciplines may be comprised. For the
                                                                                                             ‘
                sake of simplicity I shall confine myself in what follows to the consideration of
      1949]    ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY OF GROUPS                 603

     the so-called commutative or Abelian groups. Such a group is a set of a finite
     or an infinite set of elements x, y,---,A,B,      +--+ (the term “element” is used
     if we have to deal with abstract investigations where we do not want to commit
     ourselves beforehand to the considered objects being of any definite kind). For
     these elements a single so-called composition rule is given which is called multi-
     plication or addition, and is denoted by the multiplication sign - or the addition
     sign +, respectively, but which need not have anything to do with ordinary
     multiplication or addition, for the simple reason that the elements need not be
     numbers.
         If we use the multiplication sign for the composition of the group, the
     formulas
                                        A-B=B-A
                                    A:(B-C) = (A-B)-C

|     are valid, and, furthermore, we claim that the equation
                                          A-X = B,
                                                                                            :
      where A and B are two arbitrary given elements, is always satisfied by one and
      only one element X. If we use the addition sign, these rules read that
                                       A+B=B+A4A
                               A+(B+C)=(A+B)+C
      and that the equation
                                         A+X=8B

      has one and only one solution.
         Let me give you one or two examples of such Abelian groups, chosen in close
  connection with our subject.
|     First, let us consider the set of all rotations of a circle, for instance, the unit
     circle, about its center. Let the single rotation be characterized by its rotation
     angle x, where the real number x is determined modulo 27. Then the composi-
      tion rule, 7.e., the composition of two rotations x and y, is simply expressed by
     the sum x+, this number being of course only determined modulo 27. On the
     other hand, if we characterize the rotation by the point or complex number
     X =e* on the unit circle, into which the point 1 is transformed by the rotation,
     then the composition of two rotations, determined by X =e” and Y=e'%, re-
      spectively, is expressed by ordinary multiplication X -
          As the second example I choose the set of the translations of a straight line
|
      into itself. Let a single translation be characterized by the (positive or nega-
      tive) number x, indicating the length of the translation or, what comes to the
      same thing, by the point (number) x into which the origin is transformed by the
      translation. Then the composition of two translations given by x and y, respec-
      tively, is, of course, expressed by the ordinary sum x+y. Both the rotation group
      and the translation group are so-called topological Abelian groups, which means
    604   ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY OF GROUPS            [November,

    that, besides the structure fixed by the given composition, they have also an-
    other so-called topological structure, in consequence of which we may, for
    example, speak about two elements of the group lying near each other or far
    from each other. We observe that the first group, the rotation group, may in a
:
    certain sense be placed under the latter group, the translation group, by identi-
    fying those points on the line which differ by a multiple of 27, or more geo-
    metrically expressed, by imagining the straight line twisted around the unit
    circle.
         Besides these two examples of infinite groups, 7.e., groups containing an in-
    finite number of elements, I shall mention a classical example of a finite Abelian
    group, the group of the classes of residues modulo n, where 1 is a positive integer.
    As is well known, this group is a dominating factor in an essential part of the
    elementary theory of numbers. Let us consider, for instance n = 3; then the group           {

    contains only two elements which we may denote by ai, a2 corresponding to the
    two classes of integers which are relatively prime to 3. These two classes consist
    of the numbers of the form 3n+1 and 3n+2, respectively. The composition of
    the group is given by the following scheme

                          =   Qi,          =       =   Ag,         =

    This scheme states that the product of two numbers, both of the form 3n+1
    or both of the form 3%+2, is a number of the form 3n+1, whereas the product
    of two numbers, one of the form 3n+1 and the other of the form 3+-2, is of the
    form 3n+2.
        While generally the elements of an Abelian group are themselves not num-
    bers, but symbols of one kind or another, they can in a natural way be con-
    nected with numbers, generally complex numbers, so that the composition rule
    for two arbitrary elements of the group is reproduced by ordinary multiplica-
    tion of the numbers attached to these elements. This is obtained by means of
    the so-called group characters. A character belonging to an Abelian group is a
    function x(X), where the independent variable X ranges over the elements of the
    group, while the values of the function are ordinary complex numbers, satisfying,
    for any two elements X and Y of the group, the equation
                                     x(X-Y) = x(X)-x(V)
    where X - Y determines the element resulting from X and Y by the composition
    of the group. If the composition of the group is expressed by X + Y instead of by
    XY, the equation characteristic of a character reads

                                    x(X + VY) = x(X)-x(Y).
    Thus we see an evident association with the functional equation valid for the
    exponential function, 7.e.,

                                     o(x + y) = o(x)-o(y)
    where « and y denote ordinary real numbers.         It may be noted that it is not


                                                                                           4]
1949]    ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY OF GROUPS                 605

demanded that a character x(X) should take two different values for two dif-
ferent elements X, and X;2; thus for any group we have the trivial so-called main
character which assumes the value x(X)=1 for every X. Generally there exist
both real characters for which x(X) is a real number for every X and complex
characters x(X) which assume complex values for certain elements X. If x(X)
is a complex character, the conjugate function x(X) is obviously again a com-
plex character. Further, as the functional equation provides immediately, the
product x:(X)x2(X) of two characters x:(X) and x2(X) is again a character of
the group.
    I shall speak briefly about the characters of the three particular Abelian
groups mentioned above. As regards the group of the classes of residues modulo
n with h=@(n) elements X, Xo,        , Xn, where     is the Euler function indi-
cating the number of elements among 1, 2, - - - , m which are relatively prime
to m, we have at the same time, h=¢(n) different characters x:(X), x2(X), «+ -,
xn(X). For these characters we have the important relations
                                              0   for


which may be said to express the fact that the characters form a normalized
orthogonal system by a simple formation of mean value. It was the study of the
characters of this group of the residues modulo m which was the starting point of
Dirichlet’s famous proof that every arithmetical progression contains an infinite
number of primes.
    Concerning the two other groups, the rotation group and the translation
group, the elements of which we will denote by x modulo 27 and by x, respec-
tively, where x ranges over the real numbers, we will call attention only to
some of their characters, namely, the bounded characters; the unbounded char-
acters are of no importance for our purpose. For a bounded character it is seen
readily that |x(x)| =1 for all x. If furthermore we require that our bounded
characters should be continuous functions on the group, (considering the group
as a topological group, 7.e., continuous functions of the variable x), then, in the
case of the rotation group (where a character must be periodic with the period
2m) these characters are only the functions e*,            +1, +2,         whereas
for the translation group we get the much more comprehensive set of characters
e**, where \ is an arbitrary real number. Thus we realize that the mutually
harmonic pure oscillations forming the basis of the theory of Fourier series of
the purely periodic functions may be characterized from a group theoretical
point of view as the bounded continuous characters of the rotation group, while
the set of all pure oscillations e®* forming the basis of the theory of the almost
periodic functions may be characterized as the bounded continuous characters
of the translation group. Now we understand how the main problem solved in
the theory of the purely periodic and of the almost periodic functions may, ac-
cording to Weyl, be generalized to the following general problem concerning a
quite arbitrary Abelian group: Which function f(X) defined on the group, 7.e.,




                                                                                      ae
606     ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY OF GROUPS         [November,
                                                                                      |


the independent variable of which ranges over the elements of the group, can
be represented by a linear composition of the bounded characters of the group?
Precisely speaking, which functions defined on the given Abelian group can
either be represented as a finite sum s(X) = da,x(X ), where the coefficients a,
are complex constants, or can be uniformly approached by such sums?
    Passing on to an outline of the solution of this general problem I start with
the following remark, where for the sake of connection with the first part of my
lecture it will be convenient to use an additive and not multiplicative nota-
tion for the composition of the group. We consider first a single, arbitrarily
chosen bounded character x(X) of the group. Let H be a parameter which
ranges over the whole group. Then the set of all the functions {x(X +H)} will,
as is seen easily from the functional equation x(X +H) =x(X)x(H), be a com-           i

pact set, in the sense that from any sequence of functions x(X+M),
x(X+He), - + - taken from the set, we can choose a subsequence of functions
converging uniformly on the group. Furthermore from this property of any
single bounded character we may without difficulty conclude that every function
f(X) which can be composed linearly of bounded characters of the group will
have the same quality, i.e., for every such function f(X) the set of functions
{f(X+H)} will be compact. Now, guided by Bochner’s formulation of the
definition of the notion “almost periodicity” for the functions of a real variable,
von Neumann set up the following general definition: A complex function f(X)
defined on an arbitrary Abelian group is called almost periodic on the group if
the set of functions {f(X+H)} is compact in the above sense.
      As just mentioned, it is easily seen that every function on the group which
                                                                                      |




can be composed linearly of bounded characters is almost periodic on the group.
Von Neumann has shown that the converse theorem is valid for a quite arbitrary
Abelian group (and not only for the translation group and the rotation group),
so that the functions on an arbitrary Abelian group which can be linearly com-
posed of the bounded characters of the group are exactly the almost periodic
functions on the group. In its main ideas, von Neumann’s proof of this funda-
mental theorem follows previous proofs given in the theory of the ordinary
almost periodic functions. Corresponding to the theory of the ordinary almost
periodic functions, where a Fourier series of the form >A ,e‘4»* was attached to
every almost periodic function, there is also, in the general case of an arbitrary
Abelian group, attached to any function f(X) almost periodic on the group, a
Fourier series, here of the form }\Anxn(X), where xi(X), x2(X),       is a de-
numerable set of bounded group characters characteristic of the function f(X)
under consideration. By a generalization of the method which Wey] developed to
prove the uniqueness theorem for the ordinary almost periodic functions, it is
shown that also in the general group theoretical case the Fourier series deter-
mines the function f(X) uniquely. Thus, to two different almost periodic func-
tions belong two different Fourier series. A generalization of the method ap-
plied by Wiener in proving the approximation theorem for the ordinary almost
periodic functions is further used to accomplish the proof of the main theorem.       |
        1949]    ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY OF GROUPS                 607

        This theorem states that also in the general group theoretical case, starting
        from the Fourier series }-A,xa(X), we may form finite sums s(X) = > anxn(X)
        which approximate the given function f(X) uniformly on the whole group.
|          So far, the theory of the almost periodic functions on arbitrary Abelian
        groups is quite parallel to the theory concerning the special case of the transla-
        tion group. But before the theory could get started at all and be developed on
        the lines indicated above, there was a fundamental difficulty to be overcome
        which would seem to make the whole problem quite unapproachable. In fact
        the very basis of the formation of the Fourier series of an ordinary almost
        periodic function was the consideration of the mean value of the function f(x)
        defined by
H
                                        lim        f(x)dx.
|

        In the general case, however, when we consider an arbitrary Abelian group
        without any topological structure, it might seem at first that there is no possi-
        bility of defining the notion of a mean value of a function over the group. I have
|
        no time to explain the simple and ingenious way in which von Neumann suc-
        ceeded in defining this notion of the mean value mM {f(X )} of a function f(X) al-
        most periodic on the group. I shall only mention that, as soon as the mean value
        had been defined, the way was open to the further development of the theory
        in analogy with the theory of the ordinary almost periodic functions. In par-
        ticular, as might be expected, the set of the bounded group characters proved to
        be a normalized orthogonal system, that is,
                                                   0   for   x1   x2,
    2
                             atfxa(X)x(X)} =                       Xs


        This being the case we naturally get the Fourier series }\Anx.(X) of an almost
        periodic function f(X) by forming the mean value
t


                                      a(x) = At{f(X)x(X)}
        for an arbitrary character x(X) and by showing that this mean value is equal to
        0 for all x apart from a denumerable number of characters x,(X) characteristic
        for the function in question. These xn(X) are of course just the characters which
        occur in the composition of the almost periodic function f(X) under considera-
        tion.
           So far I have spoken as if the general theory of the almost periodic functions
        on an arbitrary Abelian group included in particular the ordinary theory of the
        purely periodic and of the almost periodic functions of a real variable, if we
        simply specialize our group to be the rotation group or the translation group,
        respectively. But as you may have observed, this is not the case. Indeed the
        pure oscillations forming the basis of the ordinary theory of the purely periodic
        or the almost periodic functions are not all of the bounded characters of the rota-
                                                                                              |



                                                                                              a



                                 f
          608   ON ALMOST PERIODIC FUNCTIONS AND THE THEORY OF GROUPS             [November,

          tion group or the translation group, but only those bounded characters which are
          continuous on these particular groups with their natural topology. In the gen-
          eral case of an arbitrary Abelian group, however, we must necessarily treat all
|         the bounded characters of the group on the same footing, as a restriction con-
          cerning continuity cannot be formulated at all on a non-topological group.                  a
    by:   Seen from a general group theoretical point of view, the different bounded              |
          characters are therefore all equally simple. In the special case of the translation
          group, the class of all von Neumann almost periodic functions on this group,                t
          which functions were investigated by Ursell prior to and independently of the
          general theory, is essentially more comprehensive than the class of the ordinary
          continuous almost periodic functions, as von Neumann does not claim con-
          tinuity for his class. Fortunately, and this is another beautiful chapter of von
          Neumann’s theory, the theory of the ordinary, 7.e., of the continuous almost                05
          periodic functions, proves to fit quite naturally into his general theory. I must
          confine myself to a few words about this point. Let us consider an arbitrary            j

          Abelian group, and let it be possible to introduce into this group (as it is possible
          in the case of the translation group and the rotation group) a topology of some
          kind or other in order to be able to ascribe any sense at all to the notion of con-
          tinuous function on the group. Then the main theorem will remain valid if in
          the whole of the theorem we restrict the functions under consideration by de-
          manding that they shall be continuous on the group considered as a topological
          group. More precisely, it holds for any topological group that the continuous
          functions f(X) almost periodic on the group are just those functions which can
          be composed linearly of the continuous characters of the group.
              5. Concluding remarks. In conclusion, I should like to make two remarks                 c



          in order to emphasize what has been gained by von Neumann’s general theory,
          of which I have given you only a rough outline. In the first place, and this must
          be said to be a characteristic feature of the mathematics of our day, we have
          achieved the combination and harmonization of investigations hitherto quite             |

          unrelated into one single theory of a general abstract character. Thus, in our
          case, we have learned about an intimate, hitherto unobserved, connection be-
          tween the theory of Fourier series of purely periodic and almost periodic func-
          tions not only of one variable but of several variables, indeed of an infinite num-
          ber of variables, and the theory of the group characters of the finite Abelian          4

          groups, in particular the group of the classes of residues, which forms the basis
          of the investigations of the distribution of the prime numbers in the different              |



          arithmetical progressions.
              As for the other remark, it concerns in particular the translation group and
          the difference emphasized above between the theory of the almost periodic func-
          tions of this group considered as a group without any structure (apart of course
          from the structure given by the composition itself) and considered as a group
          topologized by means of the ordinary metric of the straight line. Von Neumann’s
          theory has enabled us to fit into our considerations the total set of all the


»
          1949]                 ARE VARIABLES NECESSARY IN CALCULUS?                                   609

        bounded characters of this group, 1.e., to operate not only with the continuous,
          but also with the discontinuous solutions of the classical functional equation

                                            o(x + y) = $(x)-o(y),
          and to treat these discontinuous solutions, hitherto disdained, on exactly the
          same footing as the continuous solutions, 7.e., the pure oscillations. Indeed we
    k     have seen that in order to obtain the right systematization, it is even necessary
          to include these discontinuous solutions.
              Here, as so often before in the history of mathematics, phenomena which
          appeared at first to be, so to speak, of a pathological nature, and which therefore
          from the start had to be excluded by means of protecting definitions, were later
          recognized, from a more general point of view, to be pertinent, even indis-
          pensable, to the subject under consideration.


                                                                                                               =


                         ARE     VARIABLES        NECESSARY           IN   CALCULUS?*

                                KARL    MENGER,      Illinois Institute of Technology

              1. The definite integral. We begin with a case in which the variables are
          superfluous beyond any doubt. By virtue of their definitions, the numbers

                               f sin xdx,          f sin 2dz,          f sin ydy
                                0                   0                   0
          are identical. Hence it does not make any difference which letter we use for the
          variable. But then why write the dummy part at all? We shall simply write

                                                      f sin.
                                                        0

         A geometric consideration confirms this view. In a cartesian coérdinate
    |system, the sine function represents a curve, the sine curve
                                   y=sinzx,       w=sinz,        or    6=siny,
          according to whether the points are denoted by (x, y), (z, w) or (y, 6). The num-
          bers 0 and m determine an arc on the curve. The / sign indicates that we form
          the area under this arc. How we denote the points has no bearing on the area.
          We have

                                                    f sin = 2
                                                     0
    d
)
               * An address delivered before the Indiana Section at Purdue University, May 8, 1948. The au-
          thor wishes to express his thanks to Mr. Burton D. Fried for the careful reading of the manuscript
          and numerous valuable suggestions.
    610                  ARE VARIABLES NECESSARY IN CALCULUS?             [November,         1
    and similarly
                           1                       2
                          f sinh = 0,             f log = 2 log 2 — 1.
4                           = |                     1


          If we wish to denote fje*dx without dummy variables we experience the first
    difficulty. For e* denotes the value which the exponential function associates
    with the number x rather than the exponential function itself. But we remember
    that if in e* we have to replace x by a long expression such as




    then typographical difficulties force us to print

                          exp | ———_(— -                          —
    where the symbol, exp, is used for the exponential function in the same way
    that the symbol, log, is used for the logarithmic function or the symbol, sin, for
    the sine function. In this notation we can write
                                            1
                                     f exp=e-—l.
                                      0
          In eliminating the dummy part of {}x"dx we are confronted with the com-
    plete lack of a symbol for the mth power function which associates the number x"
    with x. If we feel that this important function deserves a symbol and we denote
    it by "II, then we can write


                                            0           n -+- 1

        We do have a symbol for the less important mth root function, namely, Y
    The typical polynomial has neither a name nor a symbol. The polynomial
    whose value for x is do+ai:x+ +++ +a,-:x" might be denoted by Pag,a,,--+,an+
    Polynomials of special importance may, of course, be denoted by special sym-
    bols. For instance, p-1/2,0,3/2 is the second Legendre polynomial and is usually
    denoted by P2. The frequent occurrence of the function associating with x the
    number ++/1—&?x? might warrant the introduction of a symbol. The fact that
    the graph of the function is the upper half of an ellipse of eccentricity /1—k?
    suggests the symbol ell yj=~ for this function. In particular, y=+/1—<? is the           ]
    equation of a semi-circle, and we might write cir instead of ello. We should then
    have
                                       1
                                                cir = 4/4.
                                        0                                                    1

                                                                                         3
        1949]               ARE VARIABLES NECESSARY IN CALCULUS?                            611
4


            Instead of the constant polynomial p., which associates c with every x, we
        shall simply write c. For instance,

                              f 2 = 2-m,               f sin 2 = sin 2-7.
                               0                        0
            All in all, what we need in the calculus of definite integrals are symbols for
|       the most important functions rather than variables.
           2. Substitution and the identity function. Instead of

                                            f sin 2xdx = 0
                                             0


        we might write

                                                     sis por =   0
                                                 0


        where sin o,2 denotes the function obtained by substituting the polynomial
        po,2 into the sine function. This notation for substitution is modelled after the
        symbol, log sin, in the classical theory where log sin x denotes the value for x of
    :
        the function obtained by substituting the sine into the logarithmic function.
        Denoting substitution by juxtaposition is unambiguous if we consistently use a
        dot in denoting a product. For instance, while sin po,2 denotes the function whose
    ;
        value for x is sin 2x we write sin-fo,2 for the function whose value for x is sin
        x-2x. Similarly we distinguish between the functions log sin and log-sin assum-
        ing the values log sin x and log x-sin x, respectively.
            But polynomials of the form o,, are so frequently studied and the function
        1/c:po,-, that is, the polynomial            = "Il, is of such paramount importance that
        it seems to deserve a short symbol of its own. For po, is the function which
        associates x with x; the function which may be substituted into any function f
        without changing f; the function into which any function may be substituted
        without being changed. It is, in other words, the identity function, and the lack
        of a current symbol for this function strikingly illustrates how little heed we
        give to the algebraic aspects of calculus. We shall denote the identity function
        by j. The above integral reads

                                                 sin (2-7) = 0.                                    ge
                                             0                                                     +

        Denoting substitution by juxtaposition we can express the properties of 7 as
        follows
                         fi = if =f for every f, in particular, 77 = j.
            Incidentally, these equalities show that it would be incorrect to describe the
j
        introduction of j for the identity function as “just writing the letter 7 instead of




                                                                     »
                     612                 ARE VARIABLES NECESSARY IN CALCULUS?                 [November,

                     the letter x.” For could we in the classical notation write

                                             fa=af=f          or f(x) = x(f) =f?
                     In particular, could we write

                                                          %    or     x(x) = x?
                     As a matter of fact, the only way of transcribing the simple formula fj =jf =f
                     into the classical notation is by way of an implication of the following form:
                     if j(x) =x for every x, then f(j(x)) =j(f(x)) =f(x) and, in particular, j(j(x)) =j(x).
                         The function j also enables us to define pairs of inverse functions, such as
                     sin and arcsin, exp and log. We call g and g* inverse functions if gg*=j. (The
                    _ functions g and g’ are reciprocal if g-g’ =1.)
                          As long as we refrain from introducing a special symbol for the identity
                     function, we are comparable to virtuosos in multiplication without a symbol for
                     the number 1.                                                                            |

                         3. Differential calculus. It is obvious also that the formulae of differential
                     calculus can be written without variables. If Df denotes the derivative of f, then
                     the basic formulae read as follows:

        :                                        I.       + g) = Df +g;
                                                Il.    D(f-g) =f Dg + g-Df;
|           a
                |                              III.      D(fg) = Of)g-Dg.
                         In III, the term D(fg) denotes the derivative of the function obtained by
                                                                                                              |
                     substituting g into f, the term (Df)g, the function obtained by substituting g into
                      the derivative of f. By conventions about the scope of the symbol D, we could
                      dispense with parentheses in either one of the two expressions.
                           If we set
    :
                                                  f =logabs,        and     g=   sin                          |

                      where logabs is the function assuming the value log |x| for x, then we have
                                                                                                              vA




                                                  Df = rec      and       Dg = cos

                      where rec is the function —'II associating with x the reciprocal number 1/x, and
                      we obtain from formula III
                                             M(logabs sin ) = rec sin-cos = cot.

                           4. The calculus of antiderivatives. We shall denote by Sf any antiderivative
                      of f, that is, any function having the derivative f. Hence we have

                                                        A. D(Sf) = f.
            1949]                ARE VARIABLES NECESSARY IN CALCULUS?                         613

            Moreover we shall write
                                    B.   f~g if and only if Df = Dg.

            Obviously, the relation ~ is reflexive, symmetrical, and transitive. We further
            readily prove
                                    C. Sf~g if and only if f = Dg,
                                    D. S@f) ~f.
‘
                In this notation, the classical results concerning antiderivatives can be writ-
7


            ten without variables. For instance,

                    S cos~sin,      § exp~exp,        § rec~logabs,        § log~(j — 1)-log.
                5. Changing variables. The crucial test for a notation without variables is
            integration by substitution. For, traditionally, this method is treated as a
            change of variables. In our notation we have, first of all,

            (1)                             (Sh)g ~S [hg-Dg].
            For, by B of Section 4, this formula is equivalent to

                                         D{(Sh)g} = D{S [hg-Dg]}
            and this last equality is true since both expressions are equal to hg-Dg; the ex-
            pression on the right side by virtue of A of Section 4; the expression on the left
            side since by virtue of Rules III of Section 3 and A of Section 4 we have

                                    D{(Sh)g} = [D(Sh) ]ge-Dg = hg-Dg.
y
            This completes the proof of (1). If on both sides of (1) we substitute an inverse
            of g, that is, a function g* such gg* =j, then, in view of (Sh)j=Sh, we obtain

                                             Sh~ [S (hg-Dg) ]g*
            which is the formula for integration by substitution. The formula clearly indi-
    |
            cates the four steps that we have to take in integrating h by the substitution
            of g, namely,
                1) the substitution of g into h;
                  2) the multiplication by Dg;
                  3) the integration of the product;
                  4) the substitution of g* into the antiderivative.
                  For instance, let f be rec cir, that is, the function associating the number
            1/./1—x? with x. If we wish to find an antiderivative of h by the substitution
            of the function g=sin for which Dg =cos and g* =arcsin, then, noting that cir sin
             =cos and§ 1~j, we obtain
        |           S rec cir ~ [§ (rec cos-cos)] arcsin ~ (§1) arcsin ~ j arcsin = arcsin.
                  Thus we do not need variables in order to “change variables.”
                                                           gly




    614                  ARE VARIABLES NECESSARY IN CALCULUS?              [November,

          It is important to realize that we can apply the method described above even
    if we refrain from introducing new symbols for special functions beyond j for
    the identity function. For instance, if we denote the function associating
    1/./1—x? with x by f and note that 1/+/1—sin? ¢=sec ¢ or, without variables,
    that f sin=sec, then we still have

                   Sf ~ [Sf sin-D sin] arcsin ~ [S sec-cos] arcsin
                      ~ [$1] arcsin ~ j arcsin = arcsin.
          6. Functions of more variables. In what follows we shall confine ourselves
    to the study of functions of two variables and shall mainly stress a few points
    which are of importance for the calculus concerning functions of one variable.
    For more general considerations the reader is referred to other publications [1].
        The relevance of functions of two variables for the theory of functions of one
    variable is illustrated by the following examples.
        An implicitly defined function f of one variable is a function which, for some
    function F of two variables, satisfies the condition F(x, f(x))=0 for every x.
    Functions of one variable which are solutions of a first order differential equa-
    tion present similar problems of notation.
        Some important functions of two variables are defined as integrals with re-
    gard to a parameter, that is, of functions of two variables with regard to one of
    them. For instance, the value of the Gamma function for x is defined as
;


                                      I(x) = fo yr dy.

    Laplace transforms and integral equations lead to similar expressions.
        The difference quotients of a function f of one variable are the values of a
    function of two variables, viz., the function



                                                                                         FP

    Similarly, the definite integral /¥f(t)dt of a function of one variable between
    arbitrary limits x and y is a function of two variables which, without dummy
    variables, can be written in the form /¥f.
        Functional equalities for functions of one variable are connected with func-
    tions of more variables. For instance, the equality for the exponential function,

                       e7-e7 = e*+¥    or   exp x-exp y = exp (x+ y),

    is related to a function of two variables. The function f is homogeneous of degree
    n if
                                       f(xy) =
        1949]               ARE VARIABLES NECESSARY IN CALCULUS?                                 615

           Finally, even the basic operations of adding and multiplying two functions,
        f and g, can be interpreted as the result of substituting f and g into a sum-func-
        tion S and a product-function P, respectively. Here S and P are functions of
        two variables for which
                                          aty,         P(x, y) =
           7. Substitution in the realm of functions of two variables. Besides the
        functions f, g, sin, exp, - - - of one variable we shall now also admit functions
        of two variables which we shall denote by capital letters F, G, S, P,---.
        With regard to the substitution of 7 functions of k variables into a function of
        i variables we shall make the following conventions (ik):
            (11). By substituting g into f we obtain a function fg of one variable;
            (12). By substituting G into f we obtain a function fG of two variables; if
        f=sin and G=S, then fG=sin S is the function associating the number
        sin(x+y) with (x, y);
            (21). By substituting (g, #) into F we obtain a function F(g, 4) of one varia-
        ble; if F=P, g=sin, h=exp, then F(g, 4) =P(sin, exp) is the function associat-
        ing the number sin ¢-exp ¢ with ¢.
            (22). By substituting (G, H) into F we obtain a function F(G, H) of two vari-
        ables. If F=P, G=S, H=sin P, then F(G, H) =P(S, sin P) is the function as-
        sociating the number (x+y) -sin(x-y) with (x, y).                                                  3
            Each of these substitutions satisfies important one-side distributive laws in
    |
        conjunction with addition and multiplication, namely,

                          (fitfy =fiytfey          and     (fi-fe)y = fiy-fev
        where y may be either a function g of one variable or a function G of two varia-
        bles, and
|
        (Fi +        5)   F,(y, 5) + F,(y, 5)    and     (F1-F2)(7,     =   F,(y, 5) -F2(y, 5)


        where (¥, 5) may be either a pair (g, #) or a pair (G, H).
            Interpreting F as a surface z= F(x, y) in the same way as we have inter-
i
        preted f as a curve y=f(x) we see that
                             z=sinx-expx         and     z= sin y-exp y
#
        are different surfaces. Both surfaces are cylindrical, their cross-sections are con-
        gruent, but their generating lines are perpendicular. Does the variable matter,
        after all?
            The explanation lies in the generalization of the identity function 7 of one
        variable, which associates x with x. In the realm of functions of two variables,
        there are two functions, J; and Je, such that

                                 Ji(x, y) =x     and     J2(x, y) = y            for every (x, y).
        We have                                                                                        :
616                  ARE VARIABLES NECESSARY IN CALCULUS?                  [November,

                   F(Ji, Jo) = F,    Ji(y,6)            Jaly, 6) = 6
for every function F and every pair (g, #) and (G, H). If a function F of two vari-
ables has the property that F(j, h) = F for every function h, then, in the classical
terminology, F is a function of x and y depending on x only. The condition
F=F(j, 0) is sufficient for F to have the above property. An example of a func-
tion of this kind is J; and, in fact, fJ; for every function f of one variable. Simi-
larly, J2=J2(0, 7) is an example of a function of two variables depending upon
the second variable only.
    The two different cylindrical surfaces mentioned before correspond to two
different functions of two variables, namely,
                             (sin-exp)Ji = sin J;-exp Ji                                |




and
                             (sin-exp)J2 = sin          Jo,
respectively. After what was said in Section 3 about j it should not be necessary
to emphasize that the notation without variables for the two functions does not
amount to just replacing the letters x and y by the letters J; and Je. We also see
that
                           S=J,+     Je   and    P
                                                                                        a

      The difference quotients of a function f of one variable now appear to be the
values of the following function of two variables


                                      J2—Ji
The functional equality of the exponential function reads
           exp Ji-exp Jz = exp (Ji +J2)     or    P(exp Ji, exp       = exp S.

The function f is homogeneous of degree n if, and only if,
                         Jo) =      "M2   or     fP = P(fJi, "MJ2).
      As examples of the role of j in the realm of functions of two variables, we
mention the implicit definition of a function f of one variable by the equality
F(j, f) =0 for some function F and the first order differential equation Df = F(j, f)
for a given function F.
    The differential equation which is traditionally written in the form

(a)                         M(x, y)dx + N(x, y)dy = 0
where M and N are given functions, can be interpreted in one of the following
three ways:
    (1) as the condition M(j, y)+N(j, y)-Dy=0 for a function y of one variable;
      (2) as the condition M(x, j7)-Dx+ N(x, j) =0 for a function x of one variable;    a



                                                                                            i
    1949]                  ARE VARIABLES NECESSARY IN CALCULUS?                      617

          (3) as the condition

    (8)                          M(x, y)‘Dx + N(x, y)-Dy =0
    for a pair of functions x, y of one variable which are traditionally written in the
    form x(¢) and y(#). We have here used the letters x and y rather than f and g as
    symbols for functions, in order to avoid the impression that we attribute to the
    first letters of the alphabet properties not shared by the last letters. Yet, the
    resemblance of (8) with the classical form (a) is somewhat illusive. For in (8),
    x and y do not mean variables, and Dx and Dy do not mean differentials.
          8. Partial derivatives. There are two operators of differentiation in the
    realm of functions of two variables, D; and Ds». In the classical theory, DiF and
    DPF are called the two partial derivatives of F with regard to the first and the
    second variable, respectively. As before, the derivative of the function f of one
4
    variable will be denoted by Df. In particular, we have
4

    (2)                          =DJ,=    1   and   DJ,   =      =   0.



4
        Now let ff be the function of two variables associating with (x, y) the defi-
    nite integral /¥f. (There is no danger of confusing /f with an antiderivative of f
    since the latter function has been denoted by Sf.) The definite integral /J sin,
    studied in Section 1, is the value of the function / sin for (0, 7). Hence, in a sys-
    tematic notation we should write

                  (fin) (0, x) = 0,       (f log)(1,
                                                   2) = 2-log 2 — 1, etc.

    The computation of a definite integral by substitution, written without varia-
    bles, reads

4



          The fundamental laws concerning the reciprocity of differentiation and defi-
    nite integration, traditionally written in the form
b
              b
          f         = f(b) — f(a) or f ft)dt = g(b) — g(a) where                = fi)
    and
                       d                            d
                                    so) wa =f soa = - 10,
    can now be written without variables


|                     f (Of) =         fr or fDf = (SfJa— (SIs
                                                                                               1'
    618                  ARE VARIABLES NECESSARY IN CALCULUS?               [November,

    where Sf is any antiderivative of f, but the same in both places, and                  a




                            Ds      f=    -         Ds       f =
                                                                                           7
                                                                                           q

          Partial differentiation is connected with addition and multiplication by the
    analogues of formulae I and II of Section 3,
          I; D(F+G)   =D;F+D.,G,

          II; D\(F-G) =F -D:G+G-D,F.
        Differentiation is connected with substitution by the following generaliza-
    tions of Formula III of Section 3.                                                         is
                D(fG) = (Df)G-DG                                             (¢ = 1, 2).
    Example. If G=P=Ji-J, then, in view of formulae (2),
                                                                                               T

                                     D(fP) = Ji:-(Of)P.                                        t




    If f is homogeneous of degree n (cf. Section 6), then
                                          fP =
    and thus
                                                                                               I
                                    D2(fP) =
    Hence
                                                   =Ji:(Df)P                                   a
    and, noting that


    we obtain Euler’s relation
                                          n-f = j-Df.
          In.   D[F(g,      = OrF)(g,         Dg + O2F)(g, h) Dh.
    Example. If g=j and thus        Dg =Dj =1, then

                         DIF(j, h)] = (DxF)(j,          + OxF)(j, h)-Dh.
    If h is implicitly defined by F(j, h)=0, then D[F(j, h)] =D0=0 and we obtain
                                 Dh = —             h)/@.F)(j, h)                          |
3
    for the derivative of the implicit function h.                                             AS


                                                                                           ‘
                D;[FG, H)] = O.F)G, H)-DG+ O.F)G, H)-D.H                     (i = 1, 2).
    Example. If we define a function H implicitly by F(x, H(x, y)) =y, then, without
    variables F(Ji, H) =J2. Using formulae (2) from III, we obtain the expres-
    1949]               ARE VARIABLES NECESSARY IN CALCULUS?                         619

    sions for D,H and DoH.
       As has been shown, /.c. [1], Formula III and its extensions to functions of
    any number of variables can be synthesized.
       9. Partial integration. Corresponding to the two operators D; and Dz, there
    are two operators
                    §; and §:2 of antiderivation and two partial definite integrals
    /iF and f2F. For instance, the Laplace transform of a function f

                                 f“exp (—#-9)-fly)ay
    is a definite integral with regard to the second variable of a function of two
    variables which, without variables, can be written in the form

                          exp (—Ji:J2)-fJ2     or     exp (—P)-fJs.

    The integral is a function of two variables depending only upon the first. If, in
    this function, we substitute (j, 0) and observe that gj =g we obtain a function
    of one variable which we may denote by
|




    Integral equations and the Gamma function can be written in a similar way.

        10. Conclusions. While variables are not necessary for the presentation of
    fundamental results of calculus, there remain two questions. To what extent
    are variables necessary in proving these results? And, are variables not desirable
    even in formulating the theorems?
        Since most students learn calculus as a tool, and since books on physics,
    engineering, statistics, mathematical economics, etc., are written in the classi-
    cal notation, it is clear that, in initiating students into calculus, we have to use
    the classical notation. Yet I feel that the possibility of a consistent notation
    without variables should influence our teaching, namely, in the direction of re-
    ducing the use of variables. I further think that, at least in a few cases, we should
    mention the alternative form and, in particular, make the student aware of the
    possibility of a consistent notation which dispenses with dummy variables. I
    even believe that the ability to grasp, say, integration by substitution without
    variables (Sections 5 and 8) is a gauge for a student’s real understanding of cal-
    culus.
y
        In proving formulae, we shall make use of variables although perhaps again
    at a diminishing rate. In proving, for instance, Formula III of Section 3 we show
    that if for a number xo the three numbers

                                    Dg,      (Of)g,      Dg)
    are meaningful, then the third is the product of the first two. (In fact, we prove
)   even more.) This result may be interpreted in the following form: At a place

                                                                                            3,
                  .




            620                A GENERALIZATION OF FEUERBACH’S THEOREM                     [November,

            where the three terms of formula III are meaningful, the formula is true. Many
            formulae can be interpreted in the sense that they are true provided that every
            term is meaningful. For elementary functions, one could even develop an alge-
            bra of their domains of definition accompanying the algebras of their substitu-
            tion and differentiation.                                                                            r
                                                                                                                 <
                Another point brought out by these developments is that the application of
            the limit concept can be confined to the proof of very few basic formulae from
:                                                                                                            i




            which all the other formulae can be obtained by some algebra.
                In concluding we mention the existence of finite models for the algebra of
            analysis [2] comparable to finite rings or fields enjoying the essential properties
            of the system of all real numbers, and to finite planes which have the essential
            properties of our affine or projective plane.

                                                     References
                 1. The author’s Algebra of Analysis, Notre Dame Mathematical Lectures, No. 3, 1944.
                 2. Cf. the author’s Tri-Operational Algebra, Reports of a Mathematical Colloquium, Issue
            5-6, Notre Dame, 1944; General Algebra of Analysis, Issue 7, 1946; and numerous other papers
            in the same issues.
                                                                                                            |




                        A GENERALIZATION             OF FEUERBACH’S            THEOREM
                                         H. F. SANDHAM,      Dublin, Ireland
                1. Introduction. The theorem that a circle touching the sides of a triangle
            touches the nine-point circle is due to Feuerbach. A generalization due to Hart
            which seems to complete the theorem in one direction is that four circles touch-
            ing four given circles touch a fifth. In the geometry of the triangle many gen-                      (
    5
            eralizations have been given, but one which is not a statement about conics is                  =:   \
            McCay’s [1], that the pedal circle of two isogonal conjugates which are col-
            linear with the circumcenter touches the nine-point circle.
                The theorem of this paper is a generalization of the last, and may be stated
            in two ways:                                                                                         1




                1. The angle between the nine-point circle of a triangle and the pedal circle of
            two isogonal conjugates is equal to the angle which the line joining the points sub-
            tends at the inverse of either in the circumcircle.
                2. The angle between the nine-point circle of a triangle ABC and the pedal circle            i
            of a point P is equal to
                                        PBC         PCA+ {PAB +
                  The proof is a deduction from three formulas found in Inversive Geometry by




        i
     1949]             A GENERALIZATION OF FEUERBACH’S THEOREM                             621

     Morley and Morley.
‘4

           2. Angle between two circles. Since the proof is by complex numbers it is
     convenient to regard the angle between two lines, denoted by XAOB,             as a meas-
     ure of the anticlockwise rotation which brings OB into coincidence with OA [2],
     and thus to have the convention

fe                                    x AOB = — < BOA.
fi
         If two intersecting circles have radii p1, p: and the distance between their
     centers is 612, and if @ is the angle, positive or negative, subtended by the line
     joining the centers at either point of intersection, then

                                 2pip2 CoS    = pi + po — 412.
     It is convenient to take this as the definition of the angle between two circles
     [2], and thus to make no distinction between +0+2nr.
                                                                                                 ay
           3. Angle between pedal circle and nine-point circle. Taking the circum-
     center as origin and the circumradius as unity, if the vertices of a triangle are
     denoted by the complex numbers h, #2, ts, then
                                         =   tobe =   tals =


     When the Euler line is taken as the axis of real numbers

|


     If x, y are isogonal conjugates and p is the radius of their pedal circle, the three
     formulas [3] mentioned are
|
     (1)                                et yt              = 51
     (2)                                E+ F+ xy/ss =
     (3)                             (1 — x9)(1 — &y) = 4p?                                           «


     where
                         +t tbs,         So = tots +               + tite,   $3 =

         Since (x+y)/2 is the center of the pedal circle and s;/2 is the center of the
     nine-point circle, and its radius is 1/2, the angle between the pedal circle and the
     nine-point circle is given by
             1—       cos = 3+          — x9)(1 —              —
     Substitution from (1) and (2) gives
                    $|1—               = 4+ 4(1 — 29)(1 — ay) —

     Thus @ is equal to the amplitude of 1—x9. This is the basis of the discussion.




                                                                         ®
                  |




    622                  A GENERALIZATION OF FEUERBACH’S THEOREM                    [November,

          4. First statement of theorem. Since the equation of the circumcircle is
                                                      tt = 1,
    then, if y’ denote the inverse of y,
                                                           = 1,

    Hence the angle between the nine-point circle and the pedal circle of x, y has
    been proved equal to

                      amp (y’ — x)/y’ = amp (y’ — «)/(y’ — 9).                                   :


          This is the first statement of the theorem.
          5. Second statement of theorem. Elimination of y from (1) and (2) gives                    4

                               = (x?/s3 — x51/s3 +                — #)/(1 — x8),
    so that
                       1 — xf = (53 — Sox +                  — x*)/53(1 — x2)
                                =        — x)(t2 — %)(ts — x)/titets(1 —
          The amplitude of
                                    (t1 — x)(te — x)(ts — x)/titets

    is the (algebraic) sum of the angles the line joining x and the circumcenter sub-                    om

    tends at the vertices, and is equal to

                                X xtets +         xtsti + LX xtyte —
    The expression
                                                      1—
    is of course real, and is negative if x is outside the circumcircle, and positive if x
    is inside. Thus
                                    x   Xtots -+- x               x   Xt yte +


    where the sign is plus if x is outside the circumcircle and minus if x is inside.
       This is the second statement of the theorem.

                                                 References
          1. W. S. McCay, Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy, vol. xxix.
          2. R. A. Johnson, Modern Geometry, Houghton Mifflin (1929), pp. 11, 128.
          3. F. Morley and F. V. Morley, Inversive Geometry, Ginn (1933), pp. 196, 197.




%
                                   MATHEMATICAL                 NOTES
                 EpiTEp By E. F. BECKENBACH, University of California, Los Angeles

             Materials for this department should be sent direct to E. F. Beckenbach, University of
        California, Los Angeles 24, California.

                         ON THE CONVERSE            OF FERMAT’S       THEOREM

                                       P. Erpds, University of Illinois

    Following Lehmer we shall call an integer n a pseudoprime if 2"=2 (mod n)
and » is not a prime. The smallest pseudoprime is 341 = 11.31. Recently Sierpin-
ski! gave a very simple proof that there are infinitely many pseudoprimes, by
proving that if           is a pseudoprime then 2*—1 is also a pseudoprime. Lehmer?
proved that there exist infinitely many pseudoprimes n with v(m) =3, where
v(m) denotes the number of different prime factors of m. In the present note we
prove the following theorem.
    THEOREM. For every k there exist infinitely many squarefree pseudoprimes with
v(n) =k.
    First we repeat Lehmer’s proof* that there are infinitely many pseudo-
primes m with v(m) =2. It is well known‘ that for every m>6 both 2™—1 and
2™+1 have a primitive prime factor; that is, there exist primes p and g such
that
                         2™ — 1 = 0 (mod ),                2'—140(modp),              fori
                                                                                         <m;
                         2™-+ 1 = 0 (mod q),               2'    1 4 0 (mod gq)       fori
                                                                                        Sl <_m.
It is easy to see that p-q is a pseudoprime. In fact we have p=q=1                         (mod 2m),
2°™=1 (mod p-gq), thus
                                  ==                 27-1.      =     (mod fq).
Also it is immediate that to different values of m correspond different values of
b-q, which proves the theorem for k =2.
    The proof of the general case will be very similar to that of Lehmer. We use
induction on k. Let m<n,<                        bean infinite sequence of pseudoprimes with
v(n;)       =k —1. Let p; be one of the primitive prime factors of 2%-!—1. We claim that
pi:n; is a pseudoprime. In fact, by definition, 2%-!=1 (mod p;-n,), also 271=1
(mod p;). Further, since p;—1=0 (mod (n;—1)), we have 27*-'=1 (mod n,) and
finally 2%-!=1 (mod n;). Thus

        1 Colloquium Math., vol. 1 (1947), p. 9.
        2 This MonTHLY, vol. 56 (1949) p. 306.
        * This MontTBLY, vol. 43 (1936), pp. 347-356.
        ‘ Bang, Tiddsskrift for Mat. 1886, pp. 130-137. See Also Birkhoff-Vandiver, Annals of Math.,
1904.                                                                                                  |

                                                     623
        624                             MATHEMATICAL NOTES                             [November,

                                    2(mi-1)
                                      (Pi-1) .                = 1 (mod Pini).

              Also p;>nj, since p;=1 (mod (m;—1)) and ; is not a prime. Thus 9;-7; is
        squarefree, and v(p;-;) =k, and all the integers p;-; are different; this com-
        pletes the proof of the theorem.
            Following Lehmer we call ” an absolute pseudoprime if a*=a (mod ) for
        every @ prime to ”. The smallest absolute pseudoprime is 561. It seems very dif-
        ficult to determine whether there are infinitely many absolute pseudoprimes. A
        similar question is whether there exist any composite numbers 2 with n—1=0
        (mod ¢(n)).                                                                                 | t
4             Two further questions are: Are there integers m so that 2"—1 has more than                    (
        k primitive prime factors? Are there infinitely many primes » for which 2?—1 is
        composite? The smallest such prime is 11.
            Denote by f(x) the number of pseudoprimes not exceeding c. I can prove                  i       ]
        that
                                                                x
         1
        (1)                           1°108 x < f(x)
                                                  f(x) <   2 ————
                                                             Gos                                    |
                                                                                                    t       I
        for every k if x is sufficiently large. In other words, the number of pseudoprimes
        is considerably smaller than the number of primes. The proof of (1) (second in-
        equality) is complicated and we do not discuss it here.


                          A THEOREM     ON THE DISTRIBUTION         OF PRIMES

                          LEo Moser, Universities of Manitoba and North Carolina

            Using elementary properties of integers only, we shall establish the following
    :   result.
              THEOREM:    For every positive integer r, there exists a prime p, with 3.27"<p
        <€3.2".
=
            This theorem is almost as strong as Bertrand’s postulate, which states that
        for every real value of x21 there is a prime p with x<p 2x.
            The following four lemmas follow easily from Legendre’s expression for
        n!, namely,

                                          nl = |],
        They are proved in [1], which contains an exposition of Erdés’ proof of Bert-                   q
        rand’s postulate.
                                                                      2
                 (1) If n < p S 2n, then p occurs exactly once in (").
                                                                       n
                                                                                   2
                  (2) If n = 3 and 2n/3 < p < n, then p does not occur in (>
                                                                           n
|    1949]                               MATHEMATICAL NOTES                                          625

                                                                         2n
|            (3) If p? > 2n, then p occurs at most once in ( ).
                                                            n
                                                                                   2n
             (4) If 2° S 2m < 2°+1, then p occurs at most a times in ( i"
                                                                      n
           Suppose there is no prime p with
     (5)                                              9 < 3:2";
     then
                  3 Q2r          Q2r    22r-1                                 2°         a      2r
fi
               3   227-1        227-1   Q2r-2          1            2°                   1



     By (1), (2), (3), and (5), every prime which appears on the left-hand side of (6)
     appears also on the right; and those primes which appear with multiplicity
     greater than 1 on the left appear on the right with multiplicity at least 27+1,
     which by (4) is at least equal to the multiplicity with which they appear on the
     left.
i         On the other hand, a simple computation shows that for                   r26, we have
     (7)                   3.277 > (2974+ 22-14            4 2) +              + 274+        4 2),

           If we now interpret (**) as the number of ways of choosing n objects from
     2n, it follows from (7) that the inequality in (6) should be reversed. Hence for
     r=6 we have a contradiction which proves the theorem for these values of r.
     The primes 7, 29, 97, 389, and 1543 show that the theorem is also true for
     r<6.
         Our method may also be used to prove Bertrand’s Postulate. For this pur-
     pose, if 2*<2nm<2°+, we replace (6) by


                                                                                    GF
     where
                                                      1
                    =                   a=             ]                 fori
                                                                            > 1, and         [=].
                            3                     2
           The details of the proof in this case can be filled in by the reader. Although
‘    the resulting proof is not quite as neat as the proof of the somewhat weaker re-
|
     sult, it is still, we believe, simpler than the known proofs of Bertrand’s Postulate
     [1, 2, 3].
                                                References
          1. R. G. Archibald, Bertrand’s Postulate, Scripta Mathematica, vol. 11 (1941) pp. 109-120.
          2. E. Landau, Handbuch der Lehre von der Verteilung der Primzahlen, vol. 1, Leipzig and
     Berlin, 1909, pp. 89-92.
          3. S. Ramanujan. Collected Papers, pp. 208-209.




4
    626                                   MATHEMATICAL NOTES                             [November,

                  FERMAT’S      EQUATION     AND    TSHEBYSHEFF’S       POLYNOMIALS                            {

                                      ALAN Wayne, Flushing, N. Y.

          There is an interesting relation between Fermat’s equation and the Tsheby-
    sheff polynomials which seems, so far, to have gone unstated.
        It will be recalled that Fermat’s equation (also known, inappropriately, as
    Pell’s equation) is
    (1)                                       v? — aw? = 1,

    where v and w are integers, and @ is a positive constant which is not the square of
    a rational number. The two smallest positive integers v; and w, which satisfy (1)
    constitute its fundamental solution. It is known that such a fundamental solution
    always exists, for if »/a be expanded into a simple continued fraction, there exist
    positive convergents Um/Wm such that v, and w» satisfy (1), and v,/w, is the least
    of these convergents. (See pages 36-38 of Harry N. Wright, First Course in the
    Theory of Numbers, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1939.)
          It is known also that all solutions v, and w, of (1), in zero or integers, without
    any exception, are obtained by equating the rational and irrational parts in the
    relation
    (2)                            Mn +            = + (1 + wiv)”,
    where 1 is any integer or zero. (See page 351 of Uspensky and Heaslet, Elemen-
    tary Number Theory, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1939.)
        Now let us put           6. Then, from (1), w:=—z sin 6/-/a. Substituting
    these results in (2), and making use of De Moivre’s Theorem, we find that
    VntwrVa=+(cos nO—i sin n6).
          Let v, = +tcos v6. Then w,= Fi sin n0/+/a, and again making use of (1), we
    have w,=(+ sin 26/sin 0)w;. Thus              +T,(m), and                   where
    T,(x) and U,(x) are the Tshebysheff polynomials of the first kind and second
    kind, respectively, defined by x =cos 0, T,(x) =cos n0, and U,(x) =(sin (n+1)8)
    /sin 0, for integer or zero n. (See pages 55—56 of Madelung and Erwin, Die Mathe-
    matischen Hilfsmittel des Physikers, Dover Publications, New York, 1943.)


                               A NOTE      ON FERMAT’S      CONGRUENCE

                                  V. L. KLEE, Jr.,* University of Virginia                                 |
                                                                                                           }
        Carmichael [1, p. 53] defines a function \ as follows (¢ being Euler’s func-
    tion): A(2*) =¢(2*) if OSe <2; A(2*) =       if e=3; A(p*) =G(p*) if p is an odd
    prime; A(2*p{! - - pf) is the least common multiple of (2°), A(p),
    (pin), where 2, f1,- ++, fn are distinct primes. He proves (p. 54) that if a is
    prime to m, then a” =1 (mod m); and later (pp. 72-74) he shows that each
i   integer m has a primitive \-root—that is, an integer which belongs modulo m to
          * I am indebted to the referee for helpful suggestions regarding the arrangement of the proof.
        1949]                         MATHEMATICAL NOTES                                627

        the exponent A(m). Now denote by L(m) the set of all integers k such that a*=1
        (mod m) whenever a is prime to m. Then from Carmichael’s results it follows
        that L(m) consists of all multiples of \(m).
            Now let us, in contrast, fix our attention on a definite exponent , and con-
        sider the congruence, a*=1 (mod h), for various values of h. Denote by C(m) the
        set of all integers # such that this congruence holds whenever a is prime to h, and
        let y(m) denote the greatest integer in C(m). (We shall show that C(m) is bounded.)
        As will be indicated below, ¥ is closely related to another function considered by
        Carmichael [2].
           In this note we establish some “dual” relations between L and \ on the one
        hand and C and ¥ on the other. The first such relation, which is an immediate
        consequence of the definitions, is:                                                   ae

           (1) nEL(m) if and only if mE C(n).

           We next establish the following result:
           (2) L(m) consists of all multiples of \(m), C(m) of all divisors of \(n).
           The proof of (2) for Z and \ was indicated above. To prove the statement for
        C and y we note first that ¢(x)       as        whence A(x) as x0. Now
        let y*(m) denote the greatest integer x for which \(x)|. (By the preceding re-
        mark, y*() is defined for each n.) Consider an arbitrary h@C(n) and let r be
        a primitive \-root of h. From the congruence,       (mod /), we have A(h)|
        whence hSy*(n) and C(n) is bounded. Now if d |y*(n), we have d(d)| A(y*(n)),
        whence \(d) |n and d€C(n). Hence y(n) =y*(m) and C(n) contains all divisors
        of y(n).
            It remains to show that C(m) contains only divisors of y(n). Suppose that
        hEC(n), h}y(n), and let b denote the least common multiple of 4 and y(n). Since
        b>v(n), there is an integer a prime to } such that a*#1 (mod 6). But we also
        have a"=1 (mod hk) and a*=1 (mod y(m)), whence a*=1 (mod b), which is a
‘       contradiction. Thus the proof of (2) is complete.
            Immediately from (1) and (2) we have the following results.
            (3) m|-y(n) if and only if \(m)|n.
            (4) L(m) may also be characterized as the set of all integers k for which
|                   m|-y(k).                                                                  |


;           (5) C(m) may also be characterized as the set of all integers h for which
                    A(h)|n.
|
            And from (3), first with m=~y(s) and n=s, then with m=s and n=X(s), we
        have:
    :       (6) For each integer s, \(y(s)) |sand s|
)
            From (3) and the above-stated relation between \ and @¢ we see:

4           (7) If n is odd, y() =2; if m is even, A(m) is twice the least common multiple
                !




                                                                                                   =
                                     |




                                                                                                           2

          628                               MATHEMATICAL NOTES                            [November,

                     M(n) of all prime powers p* for which p*-! (p—1)|. Hence if                is even,
                    24| n.
                The function M was introduced by Carmichael in [2], where there is a table
          of values of M(m) for $150 and such that the equation ¢(m) = has a solution.
          To complete this table up to »=150, we record the following values of M(n):
          M(n) =12 if n is 14, 26, 34, 38, 62, 74, 86, 94, 98, 118, 122, 134, 142, or 146;
          M(n) =120 if nm is 68, 76, or 124; M(50) =132; M(114) =252; M(90) =4898124.
                                                   REFERENCES
               1. R. D. Carmichael, The Theory of Numbers, New York, 1914.
               2. R. D. Carmichael, Notes on the simplex theory of numbers, II. An extension of Fermat's
          theorem, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 15, 1908-9, pp. 221-222.


                             ON THE LEAST POSSIBLE ODD PERFECT NUMBER
                                H. A. BERNHARD, Newark College of Engineering                              &+

               In 1908 A. Turéaninov proved that no odd number less than two million
          can be perfect [3c], a figure which is generally accepted as the minimum in stand-
          ard texts [for example, see 1, 4]. However, it is easy to show by means of well-
          known proofs that the least possible odd perfect number is greater than ten
          billion.
               Let the prime factorization of any odd perfect number No be denoted by
                                                             im   by   be       bp



          where fi, po, ++, Pm, Qty          * * *» Qn are Odd primes,    @2,     @m are odd
          integers, and Ji, be, - - + , b, are even integers. It has been known for centuries
          [3a] that
                                                                                                           |
          (1a)                                    m=    1,
          (16)                                    p: = 1 (mod 4),
          (1c)                                    a, = 1 (mod 4).
          In addition, Sylvester [3b] has demonstrated that
at   ti
          (1d)                                          n= 4,                                              |




                 Certain other conditions have been established. Steuerwald has shown
          (le)                           = bp = +--+ = b, = 2 is impossible.
          More recently, Brauer [2] extended this theme to prove that
          (1f)                #4,whenbi      =      =        =              =            = 2.
          Another useful fact has been demonstrated by Sylvester [5], namely, that
                                                                                                           i
          (1g)                                   No # 0 (mod 3-5-7).
            1949]                                  CLASSROOM NOTES                                               629

                The only numbers           less than ten billion which satisfy conditions                    (1a),
            (1b),         (1g) are                            and 3®-5?-112-13-17%. Each is found to be
            abundant by directly computing the sum of its divisors.
                                                         References
,                1. W. W. R. Ball, Mathematical Recreations and Essays, American Edition, New York: Mac-
            millan (1947), pp. 67-68.
                2. A. Brauer, “On The Non-Existence of Odd Perfect Numbers of Form
            Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 49 (1943), pp. 712-718.
                 3a. L. E. Dickson, History of the Theory of Numbers, Washington: Carnegie (1919) vol. 1,
            pp. 14, 19.
                 3b. ———, Ibid., p. 27.
                 3c.        , Ibid., p. 29.
                 4. O. Ore, Number Theory and Its History, First Edition, New York: McGraw-Hill (1948),
            pp. 91-94.                                                                                                 =
                5. J. J. Sylvester, The Collected Mathematical Works of James Joseph Sylvester, Cam-                   .
        |
            bridge: University Press (1912) vol. 4, p. 590.




                                               CLASSROOM              NOTES

                                  EpiTeEp By C. B. ALLENDOERFER, Haverford College

                     All material for this department should be sent to C. B. Allendoerfer, Haverford College,
                Haverford, Pennsylvania.

    |
                            COORDINATE       SYSTEMS      PROJECTED        ON BLACKBOARDS

    |                                    C. B. ALLENDOERFER, Haverford College                                         |

                It was suggested by R. M. Sutton (this MONTHLY, vol. 54, p. 276) that ef-
            fective teaching use could be made of coordinate systems projected on class-
    ?

            room blackboards from slides or film strips. Although it may seem unlikely at
            first thought, the projection of white coordinate grids with black backgrounds on-
            to blackboards gives satisfactory results even in undarkened rooms. The use of
            this method enables the teacher to undertake accurate plotting on a great vari-
            ety of different types of coordinate systems.
                For most teachers the practical difficulty of using this technique lies in the
            preparation of suitable slides or film strips. Through the courtesy and coopera-
            tion of a local concern a variety of such slides was prepared for use at Haverford
            College. In the light of our experience with them, a film strip of 36 frames was
            prepared and copies can be obtained from the manufacturer.
                This film strip contains several varieties of rectangular cross sections, polar
            coordinates, logarithmic and semi-logarithmic systems, and probability and log-
            probability grids. The abscissa of one of the rectangular grids is calibrated in
            terms of fractions and multiples of z for use in plotting the graphs of trigonometric
         630                                      CLASSROOM NOTES                                  [November,

         functions. Other frames contain a single straight line, parallel straight lines, and
         a circle. These are projected on string models of cones and other ruled surfaces
         to illustrate conic sections and simple space curves.
             Although this film is still regarded as experimental, limited commercial pro-
         duction is available at reasonable cost. Inquiries should be addressed to: Engi-
         neers Publishing Company, 401 N. Broad Street, Philadelphia 8, Pa.


                           SUMS       OF SINES CONVERTED               INTO NUMERICAL       SUMS

                                          H. H. DowninG, University of Kentucky

             Interesting results are obtained from equations involving sums, both finite
         and infinite, of sines of multiples of x. Both members of the equation are divided
         by x, x is allowed to approach zero, and limits are then found.
             For the first illustration let us take the trigonometric formula (Rothrock,
         Elements of Plane and Spherical Trigonometry, 1914, Example 3, page 109).
                                                                        n+      1)x         nx         x
         (1)                                                       = sin               in


         Divide both members by x and write as follows:
         sin x            sin 2x                  sin nx
                     +2
           x                2x                      nx                                                               |



                                                   sin ——-— ---                sin —                       sin —
                                        Basis.                 2           n           2           1             2

                                             2           n+1               2       n               2         x
                                                                   x
                                                           2                       2                         2

         Now allow x to approach zero. The resulting limit is




         the formula for the sum of the first ” consecutive integers.
             As a second example consider the trigonometric formula (Rothrock, loc cit.,                             }
         Example 5, page 109).

         (2)               sin        «+ sin 3x +--+ + sin               — 1)x% = sin? nx/sin x.
         Divide by x and write in the form
               sin    43     sin 3x                                sin (2m — 1)x te         sin?   / sin x           )

                                        + +++ + (22 — 1)
                 x               3x                                    (2n — 1)x                            x




ee   :
        1949]                              CLASSROOM NOTES                                631

        Pass to limits and find
                                                                      =n,
        the sum of the first ” odd integers.
           Next, consider the Fourier expansion (Widder, Advanced Calculus, 1947,
        Example C, page 327)
                       :       sin2x           sin 3x                        sin nr
                                      2          3


        Divide by x and obtain
                      sin x       sin 2x       sin 3x                            sin nx
                1 = 2/                     +             —   +++   +(-1)*"
                           x          2x          3x                                 nx
    4   Let x approach zero and divide by 2. We obtain                                                      |




        This result is found by the Cesaro summability method (Widder, loc. cit., Ex-
        ample A, page 263).
            The next example is interesting in that it relates the preceding oscillating
        series and an infinite series giving 7/4. Consider the Fourier expansion (Miller,
        Partial Differential Equations, 1941, Exercise 8, page 150)                                 4



4




                           1      2
                           5                                                                        a
                                                                                                :

        Divide by x, pass to limits, and obtain
                                  2                     2                    2
                                                        3a                Sr

        or, On rearranging,
                                                              2       1          1
        (5)
        The series in the second parenthesis is the Leibnitz or Gregory series for 1/4.
        Thus, if either the first or the second parenthesis is taken as known, the other
        can be determined.                                                                              ~


|




                                                                                                    |
                       ELEMENTARY              PROBLEMS            AND     SOLUTIONS
                              EpItEp By Howarp Eves, Oregon State College

                Send all communications concerning ElementaryProblems and Solutions toHoward Eves,
          Mathematics Department, Oregon State College, Corvallis, Oregon. This department welcomes
          problems believed to be new, and demanding no tools beyond those ordinarily furnished in
          the first two years of college mathematics. To facilitate their consideration, solutions should be
          submitted on separate, signed sheets, within three months after publication of problems.

                                        PROBLEMS FOR SOLUTION
          E 886. Proposed by P. L. Chessin and R. Gilman, New York City
          Let M bea fixed point on the radius OR of a circle of center O and set OR/OM                          b

    =k.     If AB      is a variable chord such that                XAMR=<XOMB,                then    (1) AB
    passes through a fixed point on line OR, (2) AB=k(MB— MA), (3) A, B, O, M
    are concyclic.
          E 887. Proposed by C. W. Trigg, Los Angeles City College
       Let N be an n-digit integer and M the kn-digit integer formed by writing N
e   down k times. Show that there is no scale of notation in which N*= M if k>1.                                |


          E 888. Proposed by H. D. Grossman, New York City
       Show how to cut a hole in a cube through which another cube of equal size
    can pass.
          E 889. Proposed by Michael Golomb, Purdue University
          Let k be a circle with its interior, F,F, one of its diameters, P a point on the
    axis of the circle, FiPF, a circular arc, and A:PA; a semiellipse with foci at Fi,
    F,. Show that the solid angles subtended by & at the points of arc FiPF; are no
    smaller, and at the points of arc A,PA; are no greater, than the solid angle sub-
    tended by k at P.                                                                                           i




          E 890. Proposed by Leo Moser, University of Manitoba                                                  )



          Let a1,              be m integers with a,=1 and
    Show that there exists a sequence {¢;} of plus and minus ones such that )-?. ,€:a;
    =Oor 1.
                                                   SOLUTIONS

                                 Pythagorean Triangles with Equal Perimeters
        E 812 [1948, 248 and 1949, 32]. Proposed by Monte Dernham, San Francisco,
    California
        Find the shortest perimeter common to two different primitive Pythagorean
    triangles.
        Comment by C. W. Trigg, Los Angeles City College. There are shorter perime-
    ters common to two and to three non-primitive Pythagorean triangles than those
    reported by Ogilvy and Buker in this MonTHLy [1949, 33]. The shortest perim-
                                                         632                                                        |
    1949]                     ELEMENTARY             PROBLEMS    AND SOLUTIONS                       633


    eters common to x non-primitive Pythagorean triangles, together with the cor-
    responding sets of triangles, are given below.
          x=2.    p=60;  (15, 20, 25), (10, 24, 26).
          x=3.    p=120; (30, 40, 50), (20, 48, 52), (45, 24, 51).
          x=4,    p=360; (90, 120, 150), (60, 144, 156), (135, 72, 153), (36, 160, 164).
          x=5.    p=660; (165, 220, 275), (110, 264, 286), (55, 300, 305), (297, 60,
                         303), (210, 176, 274).
          x=6.    p=720; (180, 240, 300), (270, 144, 306), (315, 80, 325), (45, 336,
                         339), (72, 320, 328), (120, 288, 312).
          Some sets of triangles, containing one primitive member, have a common
    perimeter shorter than those listed above. That is,
          x=4,.   p=240;      (60, 80, 100), (40, 96, 104), (90, 48, 102), (15, 112, 113).
          x=5.    p=420;      (105, 140, 175), (70, 168, 182), (175, 60, 185), (126, 120,
                               174), (195, 28, 197).
          x=7.    p=1320; (330, 440, 550), (220, 528, 572), (495, 264, 561), (110, 600,
                              610), (594, 120, 606), (430, 352, 548), (231, 520, 569).
          x=8.    p=840;(210, 280, 350), (140, 336, 364), (315, 168, 357), (105, 360,
                        375), (252, 240, 348), (350, 120, 370), (390, 56, 394), (399,
                        40, 401).
          x=10. p=1680; (420, 560, 700), (280, 672, 728), (630, 336, 714), (210, 720,
                        750), (504, 480, 696), (700, 240, 740), (105, 784, 791), (780,
                               112, 788), (798, 80, 802), (455, 528, 697).
          In addition, we find that the pair of Pythagorean triangles having the small-
    est common        perimeter and a common                 side is (21, 28, 35) and (35, 12, 37),
    p=84.
                                                     A Series for x
          E 854 [1949, 104]. Proposed by Jerome C. R. Li, Oregon State College
}         Show that
       I. Solution by Ragnar Dybvik, Levanger, Norway. (Using the beta function.)
    We have

          (m!)?2"+1/(2n + 1)! = >                     (n +            + 1)/T(2n + 2)
    n=0                                    n=0
}
                                  21 B(n + 1,n+ 1) = > ae                              — x)"dx
                           n=0                                        n=0       0
                                      1                                     1
                        =2]                      (2x)(1 — x)"dx = 2f [1 — 2x(1 —
                                  0       n=0
|


                        = f [(x — 1/2)? + (1/2)?]-"dx = 2 arctan 2(x — 1/2) ‘ =n.
                              0                                                                  0
         634                      ELEMENTARY PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS                                            {[November,

            II. Solution by Paul Carnahan, University of Texas. (Using Wallis’s formula.)
         From Wallis’s formula for an odd power,

                                   f          cos**tydx = (n!)?22"/(2n + 1)!.
                                     0


         Therefore
     4


                            (n!)?2"+1/(2n + 1)! =                                 2-* cos**t+adx
                                                                        0

                                                        = 2f                      cos x(} cos? x) "dx,
                                                                        0


         and

                           (n!)?2"+1/(2n + 1)!                                   cos       > (} cos?          dx
                     n=0                                            0                      n=0



                                                           f                cos «(1 — } cos? x)-'dx =
                                                                0


            III. Solution by M. S. Klamkin, Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn. (Using the
         Legendre polynomials.) We have

                                  dy = (n!)22"+1/(2n + 1)! = f
         where P,(z) is the Legendre polynomial of degree n. Therefore
                                          1     ©                                      1
                            > a, =             > 2*P,(z)dz = f (1 —                                    = x.
                            n=0          —1    n=0                                 -1


             IV. Solution by N. J. Fine, University of Pennsylvania. (Using a differential
         equation.) For |z| <4, define                                                                                       |




                                                       2            1       -1
                                    F(z) =                              )                  + 1).
                                                n=0        nN


         It is easy to show that F(z) satisfies the differential equation
                                          (4 — z)F’(z) — 2F(z)/z = 2.

         Setting z=4       sin’a, OSa<m/2,            and y(a)=F(z),                       the differential equation for
         y(a) is found to be
be




                                                     d(y cot a)da = 4.

         Therefore y=(4a+C) tan a. Observing that y(@) has a double zero at a=0,
         we find that C=0. Thus, setting a=7/4, we find F(2) = (2/4) =z, which is the                                        3
         1949]                  ELEMENTARY PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS                         635

         desired result.
             V. Solution by D. H. Browne, Buffalo, N. Y. (Using Euler’s transformation
         of series.) If we apply Euler’s transformation


     4                               n=0                 n=0


         to the Leibnitz series

                                                     (-1)*/(2n + 1)
                                               bed


                                               n=0
    id
         we find
                                           = (n!)?2?"/(2n + 1)!,

         whence

                                           =         (n!)22"+1/(2n + 1)!.
                                               n=0


             Also solved by Louis Berkofsky, W. G. Brady, Roger Lessard, and E. D.
         Rainville.
               Solution V may be found in Bromwich, Theory of Infinite Series, 2nd ed.,
         p. 62; Knopp, Theory and A pplication of Infinite Series, p. 244 and ex. 2, p. 246;
         Chrystal, Text Book of Algebra, part II, pp. 408-409.

                                           Four Cospherical Circles
               E 855 [1949, 104]. Proposed by Victor Thébault, Tennie, Sarthe, France
             Planes through the orthocenter of an orthocentric tetrahedron perpendicular
         to four concurrent cevians cut the spheres described on these cevians in four co-
         spherical circles.
             Solution by the Proposer. Let ABCD be the tetrahedron, AP,, APs, AP.,
         AP, the four cevians concurrent in P, and H the orthocenter. Let us designate
         the four circles by (Ca), (Cs), (C.), (Ca), and let A’, B’, C’, D’ be the feet of the
  altitudes of the tetrahedron. The sphere on AP, as diameter passes through A’.
|
  Therefore the power of H with respect to circle (C,) is given by (FA)(HA’).
         Now
4




                           (HA)(HA’) = (HB)(HB’) = (HC)(HC’) = (HD)(HD’)
         (1)
                                     = (HO* — R*)/3 =
         where O is the circumcenter, and R and p are the radii of the circumsphere and
         the conjugate sphere of ABCD. Therefore H has the same power with respect
         to each of the four circles (Cz), (Cs), (C.), (Ca). Since the normals to the planes
         of these circles at their centers are concurrent at P, this is the center of a sphere
                                                                                    x




         636                   ELEMENTARY PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS                         [November,

         (S:) passing through the four circles. The square of the radius of this sphere is,
         then,

         (2)                 Ri = HP’ — p' = HP’ —             +           0")/4,
         where a and a’ are any pair of opposite edges of ABCD.
             Editorial Note. For relations (1) and (2) see N. A. Court,                 Modern    Pure
         Solid Geometry, sections 218, 795, 823, 825.
             The analogous theorem in the plane is also true, and reads as follows: Lines
         through the orthocenter of a triangle perpendicular to three concurrent cevians
         cut the circles described on these cevians as diameters in six concyclic points.
                                             A Cyclic Number                                              |

               E 856 [1949, 179]. Proposed by J. T. Hurt, Texas Agricultural and Mechani-
         cal College
             Let N be an integer of p digits. If the last digit is removed and placed before
         the remaining p—1 digits, a new number of p digits is formed which is (1/)th of
         the original number. Find the most general such number N.

               Solution by N. D. Lane, St. Andrew's College, Ontario. Let
                                 N =            + --- +            + ao,                          ¥ 0,
         and
                                M = aol10?" + a,_1107-? + --- + a,                           dy      0,   4

         such that M=N/n. Since 10M = N+<a,(10?—1), we find
                                       N = n(10? — 1)ao/(10 — n).
         We see that »<10, and since 10?—1 is the largest p-digit number, mao/(10—m)
     i
         $1, or n(ao+1)   $10, and »S5. The requirement that M be integral eliminates
         n=5,4, 2. If n=1 we get nine solutions for each value of p. If »=3, ao must be
         1 or 2, and there exist solutions to the problem if         is a multiple of 6. In this
         case
                          N = 3(108* — 1)/7 or N = 6(10% — 1)/7,
         the two smallest such numbers being 428571 and 857142.
            Also solved by Monte Dernham, B. B. Dressler, R. T. Hood, M. S. Klamkin,
         Roger Lessard, Azriel Rosenfeld, C. M. Sandwick, and the proposer.




ae
                      ADVANCED            PROBLEMS             AND     SOLUTIONS
                              EpiTeEp By E. P. StarKE, Rutgers University

             Send all communications concerning Advanced Problems and Solutions to E. P. Starke,
       Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey. All manuscripts should be typewritten
       with double spacing and margins at least one inch wide. Problems containing results believed to
       be new or extensions of old results are especially sought. Proposers of problems should also en-
       close any solutions or information that will assist the editor. In general, problems in well
       known text books or results in readily accessible sources should not be proposed for this de-
       partment.

                                     PROBLEMS            FOR SOLUTION
       4365. Proposed by Paul Erdis, Syracuse University
       Let a;<a,.< +++ <a,Sm be such that the least common                             multiple of any
    two a’s exceeds n. Prove that
                                                          1
                                                   > — <2.
                                                   im1

       4366. Proposed by J. Rosenbaum, the Milford School, Connecticut
        Determine the condition which two concentric spheres must satisfy in order
    that a tetrahedron can be simultaneously inscribed in one and circumscribed
    about the other. Give a construction for the tetrahedron.
       4367. Proposed by F. E. Wood, University of Oregon                                                 .



       Evaluate the determinant
                                              nC1
                               ont Pans      n~1Co        a—1C1   Te

                               n—2Py—2         0          n—2C0** * n—-2Cn—2


                                  oPo          0                        Lo
    of the (x+1)th order where ,P, and ,C, are the usual permutation and combina-
    tion symbols.
|


       4368. Proposed by Victor Thébault, Tennie, Sarthe, France
       In a tetrahedron T=ABCD, the planes tangent at A, B, C, D to the circum-
    sphere of T cut the planes of the opposite faces in four lines. A necessary and
    sufficient condition for these four lines to be rulings of a hyperbolic paraboloid
    is that T be orthocentric, and a necessary and sufficient condition for these
    four lines to be coplanar is that T be isodynamic.
       4369. Proposed by Orrin Frink, Pennsylvania State College
       Show that in every neighborhood of a point on a surface z=f(x, y), with
                                                         637
638                        ADVANCED PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS                 [November,

f(x, y) a continuous function, there exist four points on the surface which are the
corners of a square.

                                          SOLUTIONS
                                   Metaharmonic Tetrahedrons
      4228 [1946, 594]. Proposed by Victor Thébault, Tennie, Sarthe, France
      In a tetrahedron ABCD the straight lines joining each vertex to the points        }
of intersection V and W of the six spheres of similitude of four given spheres
with centers A, B, C, D, meet the circumsphere in the vertices of two equal
tetrahedrons A’B’C’D’ and
    Solution by the Proposer.* In a tetrahedron T=ABCD, whose circumsphere
is (O, R), we designate the lengths of the edges BC, DA, CA, DB, AB, DC by
a, a’, b, b’, c, c’. Let V and W be the points common to the six spheres of
similitude of the four given spheres (A, /), (B, m), (C, m), (D, p). Then the
specified points A’, B’, C’, D’ and A’’, B’’, C’’, D”’ are transforms of the ver-
tices A, B, C, D of T by inversions of poles V and W and of powers

                         ? = VO? —            and yw? = WO? —
The theory of inversion shows that
                 BC’ = \2a/VB-VC,                D‘A' =
                BY'C" = wa/WB-WC,              D"A" =

Hence

        B'C'/D'A' = a:VD-VA/a'-VB-VC =

But VA: VB: VC: VD=I|:m:n:p=WA:WB:WC:
                                   WD, so that
                           B'C'/D'A' = alp/a'mn = B'C"/D"A",
                          C’A’/D'B’ = bmp/b'In =                  /D"B",
                          A'B'/D'C' = cnp/c'lm = A" B"/D'C".

The metaharmonic tetrahedrons A’B’C’D’ and A'’B’'C’’D"”' of T, associated
with the points V and W, are similar since corresponding edges are proportional,
As they are inscribed in the same sphere (O, R) they are equal.
    Note. If the squares /*, m?, n?, p? of the radii of the spheres of cen-
ters A, B, C, Dare proportional to the products a’bc, ab’c, abc’, a’b’c’ of the edges
of T, we have shown that the corresponding metaharmonic tetrahedrons are
isosceles. (Annales de la Société Scientifique de Bruxelles, 1947, p. 15.)

      * Translated by W. E. Byrne, Virginia Military Institute.
    1949]                        ADVANCED PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS                                             639

                                       Lower Bound to a Trigonometric Sum
          4290 [1948, 253]. Proposed by P. T. Bateman,                           Yale University

          The function —log |2 sin 4x| has the Fourier series
                                 cos x+4cos2x+
    Prove that no partial sum of the series is ever less than —1.
                                                                                                                   =

          Solution by Otto Szasz, University of Cincinniat. Let
                                  =.

                                           v

    We have
                                                                                                                       a




                    — Si (x) =           sin vx = {cos $x — cos (n+ 4)x}/2 sin $x.

    Hence

                —            — Si (x) = (1                                                     n22;0S      47.
    It follows that —S,1(x) —S,(x) increases as x increases to 7, whence
                                                                       n—1
          — Sn—1(x) — Sa(x) S —                      —          = 20                           +
                                                                       vel


    Let n=2k, R21. Then

                                                             cos 2kx                               cos 2kx
           —            — Soi(x)               2S 2% (x) +               =             2k-1\          Ok



                                                               — 1/2k = 24, —1/2k,                 say:

q   hence
                       — 2S2x(x) S 24 — (1 + cos 2kx)/2k S
    and
                          — 2Sor-1(%) S 2t, — (1 — cos 2kx)/2k S
    Obviously #:=1, and t <1 for k>1; it follows that

                                                               2-1,                                        n2=1.
    It is easily seen that equality here holds only for n=1 and x=z. Furthermore
    t, decreases to log 2, as n>,              and

                                       lim inf    min S,(x) = — log 2.
|




                                                                                                                           |

                                                                             :
    640                     ADVANCED PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS                 [November,

        Also solved by R. P. Boas, Jr., Fritz Herzog, E. Lukacs, C. D. Olds, Norman
    Miller, and the Proposer.                                                               4

        Editorial Note. The present result is due to W. H. Young (Proceedings of the
    London Mathematical Society; v. 11, 1913, p. 359) and has been here reproposed
    because of an error in Young’s proof. The problem is also found in Polya-Szegé,
    Aufgaben und Lehrsdtze aus der Analysis, v. 2, p. 79, problem 28, the solution
    being given on p. 271. In this solution Young’s error is corrected.
                                    An Enumeration Problem
          4291 [1948, 253]. Proposed by J. P. Ballantine, University of Washington,
    Seattle
                                                      n

                                     O:             n—1
                                     O30)           n—2


                                     00     0         1

:
          Consider the square array with 1’s down the principal diagonal, increasing
    consecutive integers above the diagonal, and zeros below. (a) How many dif-
    ferent paths of 7+-7—2 steps are possible from the 1 in the upper left corner to
    the element in the ith row and jth column, 727, without passing through any
    zero element?
        (b) Define the value of each path as the product of the elements through
    which the path passes, not counting the terminal elements. Show that the sum
    of the values of all the paths in (a) is the coefficient of (tan x)*-*+! in the
    (j+1—2)nd derivative of tan x with respect to x, expressed in terms of tan x.
          Solution by Fritz Herzog, Michigan State College. Let 1 Sj and denote by (i, j)
    the element j—i+1 in the ith row and jth column of the given array. We call
    a path from (1, 1) to (7, 7) a forbidden path if it passes through at least one zero
    element, otherwise it is a proper path. Let the number of proper paths required
    in (a) be represented by N(i, j). Evidently N(i, 7)=N(t, 7-1) +N(i—1, j), a
    relation which leads by an easy induction to the result below. The following al-
    ternate derivation has some interest.                                                       |

        Let P be any forbidden path and let (k, k—1) be the first zero element reached
    by P. (2Sk Si.) Let    P=Pi+P2, where P, is the part of P from (1, 1) to (k, k—1)
    and P2 the part of P from (k, k—1) to (4, 7). Let Q; be the reflection of P; about
    the principal diagonal, so that Q; is a path from (1, 1) to (k—1, &), and let Qs
    be obtained by translating P: so as to begin at (k—1, k) and thus end at (i—1,
                                                                                                \
    j+1). Q=Q:+Q2 is then a path (not necessarily a proper path) from (1, 1) to
    (t—1, j7+1). If P’ and P” are two different forbidden paths from (1, 1) to (¢, 7)
    then the first unit segment of P’ (P’’) which is not common to P’ and P”’ will
    belong either to P{ (P{’) or to Pj (P3’). This shows that the corresponding paths
         1949]                           ADVANCED PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS                          641

         Q’ and Q” will also be different from one another. Finally, every path Q from
     4
         (1, 1) to (¢—1, 7+1) is actually obtained from a forbidden path P; in order to
         construct this path P, we need only define (k—1, &) as the first element to the
         right of the principal diagonal reached by Q and then reverse the process de-
         scribed above. Thus a one-to-one correspondence has been established between
         the forbidden paths from (1, 1) to (i, 7) and all paths from (1, 1) to (¢@—1, 7+1).
         The number of the latter is known to equal the binomial coefficient ;,;-2Cj—2,
         while the number of all paths from (1, 1) to (7, 7) equals ;4;-2C;1. The answer to
         (a) is therefore

                                                                           (4 — 1)!7!
               Let the sum of all the values of all the paths (not necessarily proper) from
         (1,1) to (4, 7) be denoted by S(i, 7). Any path ending at (7, 7), 7>1,7>1, must
         pass through either (i—1, 7) or (7, 7—1). Consequently, we have

         (1)              S(i, j) = G-                 2)SG—- 1,9) + G- OSG 7-1),
    |    and this relation will hold for 1<i<j+1, (7, 7) (1, 1), if we define S(0, r) =S(r,
         r—2)=0 for r=2 and S(1, 1) =1. (As a consequence S(1, 2) =S(2, 1) =1. These
         values, although not defined by the proposal, are acceptable in the same sense as
         0! =1.)
             We shall show that
                                   {(n+1) /2]
         (2)     D.(tanz)=               >)                                             n=0,1,2,---.
                                         k=0


         Because of S(1, 1) =1, (2) is true for »=0. Assume the equation

                                                                   1, — B)(tan
                                                       [n/2


|
                                                2) =   k=0


         has been proved for a positive integer m. Differentiating and making use of
         S(0, r) = S(r, r—2) =0, r2=2, we obtain
                                   /2]
         D,(tan x) =        pe           (n — 2k)S(k + 1, n — k)(tan x)*-?*-"(1 + tan? x)
                             k=O

                          ((n+1) /2]
                      =                  {(n— 2k + 2)S(k,
                                                        n — k+1)
                                                                                                        ise
                                                              + (nm — 2k)S(k + 1, n — k)} (tan
         Applying (1) to the expression in braces, we obtain (2), which is thus established
bs
         by mathematical induction.
¥            Substituting k+1=i, n—k+1= 7 in (2), we conclude that S(i, 7) is the co-
         efficient of (tan x)! in the (j7+1—2)nd derivative of tan x.
               Also solved by Y. S. Luan, and the Proposer.
                                                                                                      t
                                   RECENT           PUBLICATIONS                                      é
                               EpiTEp By E. P. VANCE, Oberlin College
                                                                                                      é

        All books for review should be sent directly to the editor of this department, American
    Mathematical Monthly, 531 West 116th Street, New York 27, N. Y. and not to any of the
    other editors or officers of the Association.
Number Theory and Its History. By Oystein Ore. New York,                           McGraw-Hill
   Book Co., Inc., 1948. x +370 pages. $4.50.
    This book gives an interesting account of many topics of elementary number
theory, interwoven with considerable historical material. The theory is avail-
able to readers with a limited mathematical knowledge, since the mathematical
requirements are reduced to a minimum, and only “topics of systematic and
historical importance capable of a simple presentation” are chosen. The author
has succeeded in making the book attractive to amateurs, to people interested
in number theory as a pastime; and it is well suited as a text for a first course in
number theory especially for students who may not wish to study the subject
further.
    For students looking to further use of the subject, the desirability of a                     i
mixed mathematical-historical development may well be debated. While the
present treatment is interesting, and hence probably inspiring, it has the dis-
advantage that the most significant ideas and methods do not stand out suffi-
ciently. A teacher well acquainted with the subject could make up for this defi-
ciency.
   The historical material seems to be largely up to date. The history of number
symbols associated with various cultures is given at length in Chapter 1, with
plates of finger symbols, tallies, Egyptian, Greek, Chinese, and other numerals.
Reproductions are given in Chapter 6 of part of the Papyrus Rhind, and in
Chapter 8 of two Babylonian tablets, giving tables of reciprocals and of right
triangles with integral sides. Early mathematical writers are frequently quoted;
problems proposed by them are given, and their methods of solution are con-
trasted with modern methods. Most of the mathematical sections are accom-
panied by remarks on recent developments on those topics.
    Among      the mathematical            sections may    be listed divisibility of numbers
(including binary number systems), Euclid’s algorithm, prime numbers (includ-
ing a discussion of their distribution), the simplest arithmetical functions, an
extensive discussion of linear indeterminate equations, Diophantine problems,
congruences, Wilson’s and Euler’s theorems and their consequences, theory of
decimal expansions, classical construction problems. It is regrettable that no
mention is made of quadratic residues (or hence of Gauss’s “gem of the higher
arithmetic,” the quadratic reciprocity law). Among topics not usually found in
textbooks there may be noted Thue’s theorem that if @ is prime to p, ax=+y
(mod ) is solvable with x and y between 1 and +/9, this being used to prove that
a prime p of the form 4n-+1 is a sum of two squares. The function \(m) which is
                                                     642
1949]                         RECENT PUBLICATIONS                               643

the least exponent such that a” =1 (mod ) for all a prime to 2, is studied and
applied to a problem in telephone splicing. The author takes the opportunity
afforded by the properties of greatest common divisors, least common multiples,
and of congruences, to discuss concepts of importance in mathematics generally,
such as lattices, rings, and moduls.
    Numerous numerical examples and historical remarks make the progress of
the mathematics somewhat slow, but this may be an advantage for some
readers.
    The following corrections should be made. It would be desirable, on page 29,
to define “a is a divisor of c” even when c=0, since such cases are used later.
On pages 30-32, b is treated several times as though it were positive, although it
was introduced as merely not zero. The greatest common divisor (p. 40) should
be defined for integers not all zero. The word “number” is overworked; perhaps,
integer, positive integer, nonzero integer, and so on, might be clearer in several
places. Near the bottom of page 171, read inverses for inversions. On page 168,
(8-5) is the general primitive solution of a?+b? =c? only with a even; and (8-6) is
not the general solution in rationals (as stated), since in its derivation it was
assumed that v0. Indeed, the solution        a=0, )=1=c cannot be obtained with
r and ¢ rational.
                                                                  GORDON PALL

A Concise History of Mathematics. Two volumes. (Dover Series in Mathematics
   and Physics). By D. J. Struik.    New York, Dover Publications, 1948. 18+299
   pages. $1.50 per volume.                                                                |

    To write on the history of mathematics has been, from old times to our days,
a very attractive task. To write a history of mathematics is a tremendous un-
dertaking because it is identical with a presentation of mathematics itself im-
mersed in its human surroundings. As an approximate completeness is here
even more unthinkable than in other historic fields, it is laudable to write a con-
cise history as this is presented.
                                                                                           4




    This work has the great advantage of being written by an accomplished
mathematician as well as a reliable historian. Of course, the choice of what is
described and what is omitted depends on individual taste. In the beginning we
find, caused by recent discoveries about pre-Greek mathematics, a relatively
detailed report on the beginnings. The report on the nineteenth century, on the
other hand, is obviously influenced by F. Klein’s inspiring work on the develop-
ment of mathematics during this period.
   The reviewer regrets that the author does not mention the beginning of
Axiomatics and does not give the name of the basic work of the “Father of
Axiomatics,” M. Pasch. This trend in the last quarter of the nineteenth century
is important because of its continuation in the present century, particularly in
this country.
    There are, of course, many such points, more or less important, with which
some people might disagree. However, this cannot change the impression that it




                                                                                      fe
    644                           RECENT PUBLICATIONS                      [November,

    is a very valuable book, especially for three reasons. First, the reader will find              t
    many interesting details, difficult to find in other, much more voluminous treat-               s
    ises. Second, the author gives ample text references. Also, there are many por-
    traits, drawings and text reproductions. It is only regrettable that, apparently,               (
    it was not possible to print the reproductions on a more adequate paper.
=
                                                                        M. DEHN                     |
                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                    .




                                                                                            |
    A Philosophy of Mathematics. By L. O. Kattsoff. Ames, Iowa, Iowa State College
                                                                                                    (
          Press, 1948. 9+266 pages. $5.00.
       The aim of this book is to “give the beginning student an introduction to the
    many problems raised by the queen of the sciences.” The author considers that
    existing treatments of the subject are either too difficult or else not sufficiently
    comprehensive for this purpose. The book is intended for students whose knowl-
    edge of mathematics and philosophy is that of an undergraduate senior. The
    author is a philosopher, and the work has naturally a primarily philosophical
    cast.
          The book begins with a discussion of the definition of mathematics and its
    objects. It then considers the notion of natural number, with emphasis on the
    various ways of introducing it. The next topic is the extensions of the number          4
    system to rational, real, and complex numbers. This leads to an elementary dis-
    cussion of the theory of abstract sets and transfinite numbers. An exposition of
                                                                                            |
    the paradoxes then follows. The next four chapters are devoted to the various
    methods of founding a system of mathematics, viz.: the logistic, formalistic,
    elementalistic (7.e. the theory of Church), and the intuitionistic foundations.
    Then there is a chapter on the Gédel theorem and its significance; and one on the
    “signific” standpoint of Mannoury. Finally there are three chapters devoted to
    an analysis of mathematical symbolism, of the methods of mathematical proof,
    of various sorts of definitions, of postulational procedures, and of the relations of
    mathematics to reality.
          The treatment is rather sweeping in scope. Among the topics fitted into the
    above outline are the following: the notion of magnitude according to Bolzano;
    the propositional algebra and predicate calculus of the Principia Mathematica, as
    well as the definitions relating to cardinal number; Frege’s symbolism; the “em-
    pirico-postulational” definition of Pasch; an axiom set for the natural numbers
    due to Neder, but not the original system of Peano; the denumerability of cer-
    tain aggregates and the diagonal process; the theory of types and the axiom of
    reducibility; the theories of Chwistek; Heyting’s formalization of intuitionistic
    mathematics, and the main ideas of intuitionism; and a brief treatment of modal             a
    logic. Several of these topics are somewhat unusual for a book of this kind.
    Moreover the book goes into great detail on certain topics, such as the Church
    theory of metads, which are hardly suited to its purpose, both on the ground
    that they are highly difficult and technical and because their importance is some-
    what controversial. On the other hand there are, as is naturally to be expected,
    several topics which the reviewer thinks are slighted. Among those not men-
                                                                                                S
      1949]                         RECENT PUBLICATIONS                                645

      tioned at all, which nevertheless seem of major importance for the purpose of
iF    such a book, are the theory of recursive functions, the rule-theoretic methods
      of Gentzen, the stratification methods of Quine, and the semiotical methods of
      Carnap.
         The reviewer finds the style of the book exceedingly obscure. This obscurity
      is coupled with carelessness in regard to matters of detail. The book contains
      a number of sloppy mistakes of which the definition of the sum of two cardinals
      on page 84 is typical: the author states that if m is the cardinal number of a
      class M, and x is the cardinal number of N, then m-+2 is the cardinal number of
      M+N, without the obvious restriction that M and N be mutually exclusive.
      The reader who wishes to see the extent and gravity of these errors should read
      the able review by Canon Feys in the Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 13, pp. 208-
      212 (1948). Certainly the book is not to be recommended to any mathematician,
      young or old, who is seeking information on the foundations of mathematics,
      and is not in a position to have a critical judgment of his own.
                                                                          H. B. Curry

      Modern Operational Calculus. By N. W. McLachlan. Cambridge, at the Univer-
         sity Press; New York, The Macmillan Company, 1948. 12+218 pages, 29
         illustrations. $5.00.
         This book presents a concise treatment of the Laplace transform method of
      solution of ordinary and partial differential equations. It is illustrated by typical
      examples taken from electric circuits, electric transmission lines, heat flow,
      acoustics, and so on. The book is intended primarily for postgraduate engi-
 neers. Laplace transforms are defined in Chapter 1 and special rules for their
 formation are derived in Chapter 2. Chapter 3 explains the use of Laplace trans-
|
 forms in solving ordinary differential equations, and Chapter 4 deals with
      partial differential equations. These four chapters account for one-half of the
      book; the rest is devoted to evaluation of integrals, derivation of Laplace trans-
      forms, and appendices containing various definitions and theorems pertaining
      to infinite series and infinite integrals. At the end of the book there is a large
|collection    of problems and a short table of Laplace transforms.
         The author has included a great deal of useful information in this small
      volume and many engineers will find it a convenient reference book.
          It should be mentioned     however   that the author uses the “p-multiplied
      transform” defined by


                                          = pf
      instead of the more conventional transform


                                     F(p) = f
646                            RECENT PUBLICATIONS                     [November,

While it is easy to change from one type of transform to the other, the difference
must constantly be kept in mind when referring to other books and tables of               (

transforms. The author’s reasons for the change of definition are two: (1) to
make Laplace transforms identical with Heaviside’s operational forms, and (2)
to obtain the dimensional equivalence of time functions and their Laplace
transforms. The price of these two items is the loss of the simple interpretation
of the conventional transform as the relative amplitude of a typical frequency
component of the spectrum of the corresponding time function.
                                                            S. A. SCHELKUNOFF
Cours de Mécanique Rationelle. Third Edition. By Jean Chazy. Paris, Gauthier-
   Villars, 1947-8. Tome I, Dynamique du Point Matériel, 1947. 5+ 482
    pages. 900 francs. Tome II, Dynamique des Systemes Matériels, 1948. 6+511
   pages. 1100 francs.
      Professor Chazy’s Cours provides another lucid, and in this case refreshing,
introduction to theoretical dynamics. The work now appears in the third edi-
tion. The two volumes first appeared in 1933 and were reviewed by Professor
W. R. Longley in the Bulletin, 39, 491, 1933 and 41, 13, 1935, respectively.
      The first volume is devoted to particle dynamics and the second to the
dynamics     of rigid bodies and dynamical    systems in general. Together they
comprise the course of lectures which the author gave at the Faculté des Sciences
de Paris from 1928 to 1941, and, excepting kinematics, represent the program
for the Certificat de Mécanique Rationnelle. Explicitly recognizing the need for
exercises, which seem to be customarily omitted from French treatises on
mechanics, Professor Chazy has again inserted the lists of the Certificat ques-
tions, now, in seventy pages, for the years 1928 to 1946. This collection is
appended to the first volume, but the questions themselves in large part call for
a knowledge of the material which is reserved to the second volume.
    The subject matter of the second volume is largely the traditional one, to-
gether with chapters on hydrostatics, hydrodynamics, and the elements of the
theory of Newtonian attraction and potential. There is, among other things,
an instructive chapter on impulsive motion. Variational principles are neglected,
although Hamilton’s principle is briefly considered. But for the reader who           {

wishes an account of these matters there is Professor Chazy’s own treatment in
the first chapter of his admirable La Théorie de la Relativité et la Mécanique
Céleste (Paris, 1928-30).
    Professor Longley (/oc. cit.) dealt sharply with the second chapter on “the
principles of mechanics” in the first volume of the present work. Somewhere
one must choose a fundamental reference frame of rest in order to get on with
the subject. Professor Chazy places the origin at “the center of gravity of the
solar system,” the directign of axes being fixed with respect to the “fixed stars.”
These he calls the “axes of Copernicus,” and a coordinate system in uniform
rectilinear translation with respect to these defines the “axes of Galileo”;
motion with respect to either of these reference frames is called “absolute.” An
    1949]                         RECENT PUBLICATIONS                               647

    axiomatic treatment is attempted: (1) “the principle of inertia or the principle
    of Kepler” (“An isolated particle has uniform rectilinear motion, or zero ac-
    celeration”); (2) “the principle or axiom of Galileo or of initial conditions”; (3)
    “the principle of the equality of action and reaction”; (4) “the principle of the
    composition of accelerations and of forces” (parallelogram law). The second of
    these caused Professor Longley undue concern. It was Galileo’s discovery that it
    is acceleration and not velocity (as Aristotle and the Scholastics had taught)
    which requires a force to initiate and maintain it. In other words the funda-
    mental equations of motion are ordinary differential equations of the second
    order, with compatible boundary conditions. It is this vital fact which Professor
    Chazy wishes to emphasize, together with the consideration of the existence
    and uniqueness of the solution of the differential system. In the course of this
    “rationalizing” the author for some inexplicable reason never chooses to men-
    tion the name of Newton, but that is another matter. Shortly the motion of a
    particle on the earth’s surface is obtained relative to the rotating earth, the
    centrifugal and Coriolis forces being introduced at once.
       Many instructors in mechanics will prefer a different approach to the funda-
    mental concepts of mechanics. At least the attention of promising students may
    be called to this book, and they might advisedly be invited to discuss critically
    and elaborate on Professor Chazy’s stimulating account of the matter, in class
    or in their mathematics club.
                                                                      S. G. HACKER
                                 NEW   BOOKS RECEIVED
        Les Grands Courants de la Pensee Mathematique. Introduction by F. le Lion-
    nais. Cahiers du Sud, 1948. 533 pp. 840 francs.
       Calculus. 2nd Edition.    By L. M. Kells. New      York, Prentice-Hall,    1949.
    12+508 pp. $4.00.
       A Short Course in Differential Equations. By E. D. Rainville. New York,
    Macmillan, 1949. 10+210 pp. $3.00.
       Analytic Geometry. By J. J. Corliss, I. K. Feinstein and H. S. Levin. New
    York, Harper, 1949. 14+370 pp. $3.25.
       Plane and Spherical Trigonometry With Tables. 3rd Edition. By J. Shibli.
    Boston, Ginn and Company, 1949, 12+94 pp. $3.00.
       College Algebra. 3rd Edition. By J. B. Rosenbach and E. A. Whitman. Bos-
    ton, Ginn and Company, 1949. 10+523+42 pp. $3.00.
        Table of Sines and Cosines to Fifteen Decimal Places at Hundredths of a Degree.
    (Applied Mathematics Series, no. 5). Prepared by the Computation Laboratory
    of the National Bureau of Standards. Washington, D. C., U. S. Government
    Printing Office, 1949. 8+95 pp. 40 cents.
        Precis de Mathematiques Economiques et Fiscales. By Henri Eyraud. Lyon,
    France, Faculté des Sciences, Lyon, 1948. 72 pp.
        Modern Algebraische Geometrie. Die Idealtheoretischen Grundlagen. By Wolf-
    gang Frébner. Springer Verlag, 1949, 12+212 pp., 1949. $5.70.


4
is   4




 i                                                                                                                 t


                                  CLUBS       AND     ALLIED       ACTIVITIES

                                    EpITEp By L. F. OLLMANN, Hofstra College

                  Send reports of all activities, such as club reports, special features, topics with refer-
            ences, student papers, and other material of interest to L. F. Ollmann, Hofstra College,
            Hempstead, New York.

                                            CLUB REPORTS,         1948-49

                                White Mathematics Club, University of Kentucky
           ‘The White Mathematics Club met monthly during the year except for the
         months of September and December. Papers presented include:
            Use of the analytical triangle in curve tracing, by Virginia Baskett
            The use of complex numbers in linear network analysis, by J. C. Flack
            Integral domains, by A. E. Foster
            Jobs for mathematics majors, by T. K. Dyer.
            A birthday party for Dr. H. H. Downing, Head of the Department of Mathe-
         matics and Astronomy, was held in November.
            A social get-together was held at the end of each regular meeting and refresh-
         ments were served. The annual Club Picnic was held in May.
            The officers elected were: President, Fay Hays; Vice-President, Elizabeth
         Napier; Secretary-Treasurer, Eugene Miller; Chairman of Publicity Committee,
         Franz Ross.
                                                                                                               |
                                            Zeno Club, Alfred University
            The following talks were given at the bimonthly meetings of the Zeno Club
         of Alfred University:
             The normal curve, by Mr. H. S. Graf
            Multiple surfaces, by Dr. E. Rhodes
            Kirkman’s schoolgirl problem, by Mr. R. Beals
            Pick a number, by Prof. V. Nevins
            Differential equations of applied mathematics, by Mr. I. Miller
            The mil system, by Mr. H. Munson
            Inter polation errors, by Dr. E. Rhodes
            The Lorentz transformation, by Prof. J. Freund
            An introduction to the solution of indeterminate problems, by Prof. R. Polan                       q

            Non-euclidean geometry, by Mr. L. Shershoff.
             The first annual mathematics contest for freshmen and sophomores, spon-
         sored by the Zeno Club, was won by Mr. H. L. Stoll. Mr. H.Munson was chosen
         as the outstanding mathematics student of the year at Alfred University.
            Officers elected for 1949-50 are: President, L. Shershoff; Vice-President, I.
         Miller; Secretary, J. Freund.
                                                         648                                                   |
     1949]                    CLUBS AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES                        649

                          Ricci Mathematics Academy, Boston College
if      The following talks were presented to the Ricct Mathematics Academy, Bos-
     ton College, during 1948-49:
         The theory and use of the slide rule, by Thomas Coibert
         The philosophy of mathematics, by Dr. Fakhri Maluf
        Mathematics as the language of science, by Rev. J. A. Tobin, S.J.
        On the Ricct Mathematical Journal, by Patrick Leonard and John McClay
        Curves and determinants, by Dr. F. E. White
        Fields open to the graduate in mathematics, by George Donaldson
        The lighter side of mathematics, by Rev. J. F. X. Murphy, S.J.
        The first Annual Mid-term Social and Dance, sponsored by the Academy,
     was held at the Hotel Commander in Cambridge.
         Officers for the year of 1949-50 were: President, Anthony Minnichelli; Vice-
     President, John Monahan; Secretary, Anthony Lemos; Treasurer, Edmund
     Murphy; Moderator, Joseph Krebs.

                       Mathematics-Physics Club, College of Saint Teresa                    4
         In addition to a Christmas party and a Spring picnic, four meetings were
     held at which the following papers were presented by members of the club:
         The atomic age and some of tts social and moral implications
         Popular astronomy
         Time and its measurement
         Science and its impact on the literary imagination, by Sister  M. Emmanuel,
     O.S.F.
         Other activities included a field trip to the Mayo Research Foundation, the
     Medical Science Building, and the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota.
         Officers for the year 1949-50 are: President, Mary Ellen Tighe; Vice-Presi-
     dent, Rita Kulas; Secretary, Eleanor Wise; Treasurer, Nancy Tighe.                 é
                                                                                            4


                              Mathematics Club, Carleton College
         The Mathematics Club of Carleton College held monthly meetings which in-
     cluded a picnic, a Christmas party, and a program of mathematical recreations.
     The movie A triple integral was also shown. The talks presented during the year
'
     1948-49 were:
        Calculating machines, by Dr. K. May
        Graphical representation of complex roots, by Prof. L. Beasley
                                                                                        =
         Mathematical implications of Zeno’s paradoxes, by Prof. M. Capek
         Wire puzzles, by Prof. C. Hatfield
        Review of “Flatland,” by E. A. Abbott, by Miss Jeane M. Baldwin.
        Officers for the year 1948-49 were: President, Joan Snapper; Vice-President,
     Kinsey Anderson; Secretary, Yolanda Stork; Faculty Advisor, Prof. Kenneth
     May.



|
    :                                                                                                                  1!

                                          NEWS       AND NOTICES
                        EpiTED By EpitH R. SCHNECKENBURGER, University of Buffalo
                 Readers are invited to contribute to the general interest of this department by sending
            news items to Edith R. Schneckenburger, University of Buffalo, Buffalo 14, New York. ltems
            must be submitted at least two months before publication can take place.
                            RESEARCH FELLOWSHIPS IN PSYCHOMETRICS                                                      t
            The Educational Testing Service is offering for 1950-51 its third series of
         research fellowships in psychometrics leading to the Ph.D. degree at Princeton                                a
         University. Open to men who are acceptable to the Graduate School of the
         University, the two fellowships each carry a stipend of $2,375 a year and are
         normally renewable.                                                                                           ‘
             Fellows will be engaged in part-time research in the general area of psycho-                              11
         logical measurements at the offices of the Educational Testing Service and will,
         in addition, carry a normal program of studies in the Graduate School. Compe-
         tence in mathematics and psychology is a prerequisite for obtaining these fellow-
         ships. Information and application blanks may be obtained from: Director of
         Psychometric Fellowship          Program,      Educational      Testing       Service,   Box   592,
         Princeton, N. J.                                                                                              a

                                               PERSONAL       ITEMS
            Cornell University announces: Assistant Professor G. L. Walker of Purdue
         University has been appointed Visiting Assistant Professor of Mathematics;
         Dr. Bertram Yood has been promoted to an assistant professorship; Assistant
         Professor G. B. Robison of Sampson College has been appointed to a teaching
         fellowship.
             Marietta College reports that Mr. R. E. Eberhard has been appointed to an
:                                                                                                                      é
         instructorship and that Miss Margaret Bootz has resigned to continue graduate
         study at Ohio State University.
                                                                                                                       \
             Oberlin College makes the following announcements: Acting Chairman E. P.
         Vance has been promoted to the position of Chairman of the Department of
         Mathematics; Assistant Professor R. W. Wagner has been promoted to an                                 |


         associate professorship; Dr. Bryant Tuckerman of Cornell University has been
         appointed to an assistant professorship.
            At the University of Colorado: Professor A. J. Kempner has retired and has
         accepted a visiting professorship at Pomona College; Dr. A. B. Farnell of Prince-
         ton University has been appointed to an assistant professorship.                                      |

             Wayne University announces: Assistant Professor Russell Ackoff has been
         transferred from the Department of Philosophy to the Department of Mathe-
         matics; Mr. Samuel Conte has returned from a leave of absence; Mr. Bertram                                A


         Eisenstadt has been appointed Assistant Professor of Mathematics.                                     é
             Dr. Milton Abramowitz of the Computation Laboratory of the National
         Bureau of Standards is now associated with the Numerical Mathematics Service
                                                                                                                           ‘




         of New York City.
             Instructor H. P. Atkins, Jr., of the University of Rochester has been pro-
                                                        650



    1%
         1949]                          NEWS AND NOTICES                                651

         moted to an assistant professorship.
             Assistant Professor A. H. Bailey of Georgia Institute of Technology        has
         been promoted to an associate professorship.
            Dr. T. A. Bancroft, formerly director of the Statistical Laboratory of Ala-
         bama Polytechnic Institute, has accepted a position at the Statistical Labora-
         tory, lowa State College.
                                                                                              #



             Lecturer J. D. Bankier of McMaster       University has been promoted to an
         associate professorship.
             Dr. W. E. Barnes of Cornell University has been appointed to an assistant
         professorship at the College of William and Mary.
             Mr. D. Y. Barrer of Northwestern University has been promoted to an
         instructorship.
             Assistant Professor I. L. Battin of Drew University has been promoted to
         an associate professorship.
             Mr. A. V. Bauser, formerly engineer, Elliott Company, Ridgeway, Pennsyl-
         vania, is now teaching at J. W. Cooper High School, Shenandoah, Pennsylvania.
             Associate Professor J. W. Beach of the    New Mexico School of Mines has been
         appointed Assistant Professor of Mathematics at the University of New Mexico.
             Mr. R. W. Beals has been appointed to an instructorship at Alfred Univer-
4        sity.
             Assistant Professor S. Louise Beasley of Carleton College has been appointed
         to an assistant professorship at Lindenwood College.
             Instructor R. F. Bell has been promoted to an assistant professorship at
         Eastern Washington College of Education.
             Assistant Professor F. L. Celauro of Newark College of Engineering has been
         appointed Associate Professor and Head of the Department of Mathematics at
         Western State College of Colorado.
             Dr. Sarvadaman Chowla of the Institute for Advanced Study has been ap-
         pointed to an acting professorship at the University of Kansas.
             Professor J. W. Clawson has been appointed Dean of Ursinus College.
             Assistant Professor V. F. Cowling of Lehigh University has been appointed
         to an associate professorship at the University of Kentucky.
             Instructor R. R. Croxton of the University of South Carolina has been
         promoted to the position of Adjunct Professor of Mathematics.
             Associate Professor J. C. Currie of Alabama Polytechnic Institute has ac-
         cepted an associate professorship at Georgia Institute of Technology.
             Mr. J. E. Darraugh of the Consolidated Edison Company, New York City,
         has been appointed to an instructorship at Case Institute of Technology.
             Professor D. C. Dearborn, Catawba College, has been appointed Dean.
             Assistant Professor F. G. Dressel of Duke University has been promoted to
         an associate professorship.
             Mr. W. M.     Duke, chairman   of Research    Division,   Cornell Aeronautical
    7
     q   Laboratory, has been promoted to the position of Assistant Director.
             Dean W. H. Durfee has been promoted to the position of Provost of the
         Colleges of the Seneca.                                                                  i
                                                                                                      1!
     652                            NEWS AND NOTICES                      [November,

         Reverend L. E. Ernsdorff of Loras College has been promoted from an in-
     structorship to an associate professorship.                                                      t

         Professor F. A. Ficken of the University of Tennessee has been granted a
                                                                                         Ya



     leave of absence for the year 1949-50 and is spending the year at the Institute                  b
     of Mathematics and Mechanics, New York University.
         Dr. C. D. Firestone, Rutgers University, has been promoted to an assistant
     professorship.
           Dr. M. M. Flood of the American Statistical Association has accepted a
     position as project officer with the Rand Corporation, Santa Monica.
         Associate Professor C. B. Gass of Nebraska Wesleyan University is now                        a

     Professor of Mathematics and Dean of Men.
         Mr. B. T. Goldbeck, Jr., graduate student at Texas Christian University,                     t

ae   has been appointed to an instructorship at the University of Wyoming.
                                                                                                      a
         Assistant Professor Parker Hamilton, formerly of Boston University, has
     accepted an appointment at Antioch College.                                              |


         Mr. R. A. Harrison, formerly master at St. Mark’s School, Southborough,          4           a

     Massachusetts, has been appointed Chairman of the Department of Mathe-
     matics of The Peddie School, Hightstown, New Jersey.                                             a
         Professor M. A. Hill, Jr., of the University of North Carolina is now Associ-
     ate Dean of the General College.
         Miss Ruth I. Hoffman who has been teaching at North High School, Denver,
     is now Dean at Byers Jr. High School, Denver.
         Mr. W. C. Hoffman, Iowa State College of Agriculture and Mechanic Arts,
     has accepted a position as assistant social scientist with the Rand Corporation,                 I
     Santa Monica.
           Assistant Professor C. H. Holton has been promoted to an associate pro-                    as

     fessorship at Georgia Institute of Technology.
         Associate Professor G. B. Huff of the University of Georgia has been pro-                    <

     moted to a professorship.
        Assistant Professor M. Gweneth Humphreys of Newcomb Memorial College,                         «


     Tulane University, has been appointed to an associate professorship at Randolph-
     Macon Woman’s College.
        Dr. Solomon Hurwitz, City College of the City of New York, has been pro-
     moted to an assistant professorship.                                                                 |

           Instructor B. C. Horne, Jr., Virginia Polytechnic Institute, has been pro-
     moted to an assistant professorship.
         Professor J. B. Jeffries, Agricultural and Technical College of North Caro-          f




     lina, has accepted a position as assistant director with the Midway Technical
     School, New York City.                                                                       :
         Associate Professor R. E. Johnson of Yale University has been appointed
     to an associate professorship at Smith College.
         Mr. Winfield Keck of Lafayette College has been promoted to an assistant
     professorship.
    1949]                         NEWS AND NOTICES                             653

        Instructor W. J. Klimczak of the University of Rochester has been promoted
    to an assistant professorship.
        Mr. J. A. LaRue, formerly teaching fellow at West Virginia University, has
    been appointed to an instructorship at Morris Harvey College.
       Mrs. Sally I. Lipsey, teacher at Taft High School, New York City, has been
    appointed Lecturer at Hunter College.
        Assistant Professor Ella Marth, Harris Teachers College, is now Associate
    Professor of Mathematics and Dean of Women.
        Mr. A. L. Mayerson, Institute of Life Insurance, has accepted a position
    as actuarial assistant with the National Surety Corporation, New York City.
        Associate Professor F. J. Murray of Columbia University has been promoted
    to a professorship.
        Mr. J. D. Newburgh of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has been
    appointed a member of the Institute for Advanced Study.
        Miss Margaret Owchar, formerly instructor at Rockford College, has been
    appointed to an instructorship at the University of Minnesota.
        Mr. C. L. Perry of the University of Michigan has been appointed to an
    assistant professorship at the University of Arkansas.
;      Professor W. G. Pollard has been appointed Executive Director of the Oak
    Ridge Institute of Nuclear Studies.
       Associate Professor D. H. Porter is on leave of absence from Marion College
    and has a position as teaching fellow at Indiana University.
       Dr. R. C. Prim of Princeton University has accepted a position as mathe-
    matician with the Bell Telephone Laboratories.
       Assistant Professor A. L. Putnam of the University of Chicago has been
    appointed to a professorship at New York University.
        Dr. H. J. Ryser of the Institute for Advanced Study has been appointed to
a   an assistant professorship at Ohio State University.
        Dr. W. R. Scott, University of Michigan, has received an appointment as
    assistant professor at the University of Kansas.
        Assistant Professor W. T. Scott, Northwestern University, has been pro-
    moted to an associate professorship.
        Mr. K. M. Siegel is now Research Associate at the Aeronautical Research
    Center, University of Michigan, Willow Run Airport, Ypsilanti.
        Assistant Professor W. C. Taylor, University of Cincinnati, has accepted
    a position as mathematician with the Ballistics Laboratory, Aberdeen Proving
    Ground, Maryland.
        Mr. E. F. Trombley, formerly assistant instructor at the University of
    Chicago, has been appointed to an instructorship at Illinois Institute of Tech-
    nology.
        Professor J. A. Ward, who has been serving as assistant head of the Depart-
    ment of Mathematics of the University of Georgia, has been appointed to
    a professorship at the University of Kentucky.




            :
    654                    MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION           OF AMERICA             [November,

          Professor K. L. Warren of Millsaps College has been appointed Associate
    Professor of Physics, Kent State University.
        Dr. V. M. Wolontis of Harvard University has been appointed to an assistant
    professorship at the University of Kansas.                                                           B
          Instructor H. M. Zerbe, Hazleton Center of Pennsylvania State College, has                     N
    been promoted to an assistant professorship.                                                         R
                                                                                                         C
          Reverend J. E. Case, S.J., director of the Department of Mathematics of St.
                                                                                                         P




    Louis University, died on August 5, 1949.
        Dr. J. K. L. MacDonald of the Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake,
    died February 3, 1949.
        Professor A. H. Mowbray of the University of California died on January 7,
    1949.
                                                                                                         \

                                                                                                     q   E




2                                                                                                        \
                THE MATHEMATICAL               ASSOCIATION          OF AMERICA
                              Official Reports and Communications
               THE THIRTY-FIRST SUMMER              MEETING OF THE ASSOCIATION
          The thirty-first summer meeting of the Mathematical Association of America
    was held at the University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, on Monday and                             }
                                                                                                         I
    Tuesday, August 29-30, 1949 in conjunction with the summer meetings of the
    American Mathematical Society, the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, and                         I
                                                                                                         I
    the Econometric Society. A total of seven hundred and seventy adults were
    registered, including the following three hundred and thirty-five members of the
    Association:
    V. W. Apxisson, University of Arkansas           J. E. BEARMAN, University of Minnesota
    O. W. ALBERT, University of Redlands             E. F. BECKENBACH, University of California at
    E. B. ALLEN, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute          Los Angeles
    R. D. ANDERSON, University of Pennsylvania       May M. BEENKEN, Immaculate Heart College
    R. V. ANDERSON, Colorado A & M College           AutceE K. BELL, Fresno State College
    R. V. ANDREE, University of Oklahoma             J.H. BELL, Michigan State College
    K. J. ARNOLD, University of Wisconsin            B. C. BELLAMY, Bellamy & Sons
    W. L. Ayres, Purdue University                   THEODORE BENNETT, Marietta College
    J                                                S. F. Brss, Illinois Institute of Technology
    I. A.                                            F. C. BrEsELE, University of Utah
    C. F. Barr, University of Wyoming                E., E. BLANCHE, United States Army
    D. Y. Barrer, Northwestern University            H. D. Brock, Iowa State College
    D. L. Barrick, University of Colorado            R. P. Boas, Mathematical Reviews
    H. G. H. Bartram, Cornell University             H. F. Bounenstust, California Institute of
    M. A. Basoco, University of Nebraska                  Technology
    P. T. BATEMAN, Institute for Advanced Study      A. W. BotpyreErrF, University of New Mexico
    J. W. Beacu, University of New Mexico            T. A. Botts, University of Virginia
    1949]
    ||                     MATHEMATICAL      ASSOCIATION    OF AMERICA                       655
                                                                                             =



    J. W. BrapsHaw, University of Michigan          P. D. Epwarps, Ball State Teachers College
    H. E. Bray, Rice Institute                      W. E. Exman, University of South Dakota
    J. R. Britton, University of Colorado           TERRELL ELis, North Texas State College
    J. C. Brixey, University of Oklahoma                   Erpés, University of Illinois
    B. K. Brown, James Millikin University          G. C. Evans, University of California
    M. C. Brown, University of Kentucky             H. P. Evans, University of Wisconsin
    R. C. Buck, Brown University                    Howarp Eves, Oregon State College
    C. E.            Sandia Laboratory              G. M. Ew1ne, University of Missouri
    P. B. BurcHaAM, University of Missouri          A. B. FARNELL, University of Colorado
    HERBERT BUSEMAN, University of Southern         WILLIAM FELLER, Cornell University
         California                                 H. H. Ferns, University of Saskatchewan
    J. H. Busuey, Hunter College                    F. N. Fiscu, Colorado State College of Educa-
                H. BusHey, Hunter College                tion
    C. H. ButLer, Western Michigan College          C. H. Fiscuer, University of Michigan
    S. S. Carrns, University of Illinois            L. R. For», Illinois Institute of Technology
                                                                                                    f
    W. D. Carrns, Oberlin College                   W. C. ForEMAN, University of Kansas
       W. Cackin, Rice Institute                    J. S. Frame, Michigan State College
4
          . CAMERON, University of North Carolina   TuorntTon C. Fry, Bell Telephone Laboratories
          . Camp, University of Nebraska            L. E. Futter, University of Wisconsin
           . CAMPAIGNE, United States Navy          M. G. GaBa, University of Nebraska
           . CARPENTER, Colorado School of Mines    H. M. GeuMaANn, University of Buffalo
            . CARVER, Cornell University            F. C. Gentry, Arizona State College
         . CHELIUS, Atomic Energy Commission        R. E. Gitman, Brown University
       <O . CHURCHILL, University of Michigan       J. W. Givens, University of Tennessee
    A. G. CLarK, Colorado A & M College             A. M. GLEason, Harvard University
    HELEN E. Ciarxson, Creighton University         MIcHAEL GoLoms, Purdue University
    NATHANIEL CosurNn, University of Michigan       R. N. Goss, Iowa State College
    C, J. Coz, University of Michigan               W.H. GottscHaLk, University of Pennsylvania
    Nancy            Syracuse University            CornELius GouweEns, Iowa State College
    E. P. CoLemMAN, Highland Falls, N. Y.           J. W. GREEN, University of California at Los
    L. A. CoLguitt, Texas Christian University           Angeles
    E. G. H. Comrort, Illinois Institute of Tech-   R. E. GREENwoop, University of Texas
         nology                                     Ep1son GREER, Kansas State College
    J. A. CooLey, University of Tennessee           F. L. GrirFin, Reed College
j
    N. . Court, University of Oklahoma              V. G. Grove, Michigan State College
        R. CowELL, Kansas State College             H. T. Guarp, Colorado A & M College
        W.Crain, Purdue University                  D. F. Gunper, Cornell University
      A, Crow, U.S. Naval Ordnance Test Station     W. S. Gustin, Indiana University
     . H. Curtiss, National Bureau of Standards     BEaTRICE L. HaAGEN, Pennsylvania State Col-
     . A. Daum, Texas A & M College                      lege
      . H. Daus, University of California at Los    FRANKLIN Haimo, Washington University
         Angeles                                    P. R. Hatmos, University of Chicago
    M. W. DE JonceE, Purdue University              O. H. Hamitton, Oklahoma A & M College
    R. F. Deniston, Iowa State College              Crara L. Hancock, Virginia Junior College
    W. W. Denton, University of Arizona             J. R. Hanna, University of Wichita
    R. P. Ditwortu, California Institute of Tech-   W. R. Hanson, City College of San Francisco
         nology                                     KATHARINE E. Hazarp, Rutgers University
    BERNARD DimsDALE, Aberdeen Proving Ground       E. A. HazLEwoop, Texas Technological College
    Roy Dusiscu, Fresno State College               I. L. HEBEL, Colorado School of Mines
    W. L. Duren, Tulane University                  G. A. HEDLunp, Yale University
    J. M. Ear, University of Omaha                  E. R. HEINEMAN, Texas Technological College
    E. D. Eaves, University of Tennessee            E. D. HELLINGER, Illinois Institute of Tech-
    PauL EBERHART, Washburn University                   nology
                 656                  MATHEMATICAL      ASSOCIATION    OF AMERICA            {[November,

                 Ann S. HENRIQUES, University of Utah          W. G. Leavitt, University of Nebraska          I
                 GERTRUDE A. HErR, Iowa State College          SoLomon LEFscHETZ, Princeton University        (
                 J. G. Herriot, Stanford University            D. H. LexMer, University of California
                 Fritz HERzoG, Michigan State College          L. C. LEITHOLD, Phoenix College                ]
                 M. R. HEsTENES, University of California at   W. T. LENSER, University of Nebraska           (
                      Los Angeles                              W. J. LEVEQUE, University of Michigan
                 T. H. HitpEBRaAnnT, University of Michigan    Harry Levy, University of Illinois
                 A. G. Hitt, North Dakota Agricultural Col-    A. J. Lewis, University of Denver
                      lege                                     C. F. Lewis, Kansas State College
                 J. J. L. Hinricusen, Iowa State College       F. A. Lewis, University of Alabama
                 P. G. Hoe, University of California at Los    S. B. Lirraver, Columbia University
                      Angeles                                  W. S. Loup, University of Minnesota
                 D. L. Hott, Iowa State College                R. G. LusBBEn, University of Texas
                 Cart Hottom, U.S.A.F. Institute of Tech-      SAUNDERS MacLANE, University of Chicago
                       nology                                  M. L. Mapison, Colorado A & M College
                 LeRoy Hovusar, University of Colorado         Morris MARDEN, University of Wisconsin
                 R. E. Horton, Los Angeles City College        ANNA Marys, Bethany College
        4
        f
                 L. AILEEN Hostinsky, Temple University        D. C. B. Marsa, University of Arizona
                 E. Marie Hove, Hofstra College                M. H. Martin, University of Maryland
                 J. M. Howe .t, Los Angeles City College       J. R. Mayor, University of Wisconsin
5
            \
            J,
                 H. K. HuGues, Purdue University               R. B. McCLEnon, Grinnell College
}
                 P. F. Huttaquist, University of Colorado      E.LotsE McCorp, University of Wichita
¢
    x
                 M. GwenetH Humpsreys, Randolph-Macon          Dorotuy McCoy, Wayland College
                       Woman's College                         N. H. McCoy, Smith College
                 N. C. HunsaKEr, Utah State College            L. H. McFartan, University of Washington
                 BurroweEs Hunt, University of Colorado        E. J. McSHANE, University of Virginia
                 C. C. Hurp, International Business Machines      . E. MEDER, JR., Rutgers University
                       Corp.                                      . S. MERRILL, Montana State University
                 W. R. HutcHerson, University of Florida          . C. MEYER, University of Arizona
                 C. A. Hutrcuinson, University of Colorado     H. L. MEYER, JRr., University of Chicago
                 H. H. Irwin, State College of Washington          . R. Mrppemiss, University of Washington
                 T. W. Jackson, Jamestown College                 . A. MILLER, University of Mississippi
                  B. W. Jones, University of Colorado             . W. Moore, U.S. Naval Academy
                 G. K. Katiscu, University of Minnesota        F. R. Morris, Fresno State College
                  IRvING KAPLANSKY, University of Chicago      Dorotuy J. Morrow, Civil Aeronautics Ad-
                 Lots Karr, Lindenwood College                        ministration
                  M. W. KELLER, Purdue University              S. B. Myers, University of Michigan
                 J. L. KEttey, University of California        W. K. NE son, University of Colorado
                  CLARIBEL KENDALL, University of Colorado     Greta NEUBAUER, University of Wyoming
                  P. W. KetcuuM, University of Illinois        C. V. Newsom, University of the State of New
                  D. E. KisBey, Syracuse University                    York
                  E. C. Kr1eEFER, James Millikin University    Ivan NIVEN, University of Oregon
                 W. J. KirxHaM, Oregon State College            M. L. NorbDeEn, Johns Hopkins University
                 J. R. Kure, University of Pennsylvania        Rut E. O’DonneELL, Duquesne University
                  H. L. KRALL, Pennsylvania State College      E. G. Ops, Carnegie Institute of Technology
                  MAx KRraMER, University of Illinois          Emma J. Orson, Kent State University
                  G. M. Kuznets, University of California       R. L. O’Quinn, Louisiana State University
                  O. E. LaNcasTER, United States Navy          J. C. Oxtosy, Bryn Mawr College
                  JosErH Lanpin, University of Illinois         H. C. Peterson, University of Denver
                  R. E. LANGER, University of Wisconsin         R. P. PETERSON, University of California at
                  H. D. Larsen, Albion College                         Los Angeles
                  C. G. Latimer, Emory University              T. S. PETERSON, University of Oregon
                  D. H. LEavens, Colorado Springs, Colo.       A. D. Pierson, Jr. College of Kansas City
       1949]               MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA                               657

  MarGaRET M. PIHLBLAD, University of Kansas        SistER M.             LarKEy, College of St.
  GEORGE PIRANIAN, University of Michigan                Teresa
  J. C. PoLLey, Wabash College                      SistER M. TERESINE LEwis, Fontbonne Col-
  FLORENCE E. Poot, University of Nebraska               lege
  G. B. Price, University of Kansas                 SIsTER ROSE MARGARET Cook, Loretto Heights
  A. L. Putnam, University of Chicago                    College
  E. D. RAINVILLE, University of Michigan           M. F. SmILey, State University of lowa
  J. F. Ranpotpu, University of Rochester           A. H. Smitu, Purdue University
          B. RasMusEN, Chicago City College         F. C. Situ, College of St. Thomas
  L. T. RATNER, Vanderbilt University               G. W. Smita, University of Kansas
  L. L. Raucu, University of Michigan               H. L. Situ, Louisiana State University
  C. B. Reap, University of Wichita                 L. C. SNIVELY, University of Colorado
  M. O. READE, University of Michigan               ELizaBETH S. SOKOLNIKOFF, University of
  O. H. RECHARD, University of Wyoming                    Wisconsin
  O. W. RECHARD, Ohio State University              I. S. SoKOLNIKOFF, University of California at
  J. K. Recxzen, New Jersey State Teachers                Los Angeles
        College                                     T. H. SourHarpD, Wayne University
  Mina S. REEs, United States Navy                  F. W. Sparks, Texas Technological College
  P. K. REEs, Louisiana State University            E. J. SpPEcHT, Emmanuel Missionary College
  R. F. REEvEs, Iowa State College                  ViviAN E. Spencer, U.S. Bureau of Census
  W. T. Rep, Northwestern University                C. E. SpriNnGER, University of Oklahoma
   IRVING REINER, University of Illinois            K. H. Staut, University of Colorado
|
  J. G. RENNO, University of Wisconsin              L. W. Stark, Atlantic Christian College
  C. N. REyNotps, West Virginia University          B. M. Stewart, Michigan State College
   H. L. Rice, University of Omaha                  Rut W. SToKEs, Syracuse University
   F. A. Rickey, Louisiana State University         E. B. StourFER, University of Kansas
   P. R. RipER, WASHINGTON University               C. J. StrowELL, McKendree College
   L. G. R1cGs, Northwestern University             A. G. Swanson, Gustavus Adolphus College
   L. A. RINGENBERG, Eastern Illinois State Col-    Otto Szasz, University of Cincinnati
        lege                                        A. HELEN Tappan, Western College
   D. D. Rippe, University of Michigan              A. H. Tavs, Institute for Advanced Study
   E. K. Ritter, University of Michigan             V. B. TEMPLE, Louisiana College
   B. D. Roserts, New Mexico Highlands Uni-          H. P. THrELMAN, Iowa State College
        versity                                      J. M. THomas, Duke University
   FRED RoBERTSON, Iowa State College                F. B. THompson, University of California
   RAPHAEL M. Rosinson, University of Cali-          R. M. THRALL, University of Michigan
        fornia                                       LEONARD TORNHEIM, University of Michigan
   FLORENCE V. RonDE, University of Kentucky         E. P. Tovant, University of Colorado
| ARTHUR ROSENTHAL, Purdue University                A. W. Tucker, Princeton University
   J. B. Rosser, Institute for Numerical Analysis    J. W. Tukey, Princeton University
   M. F. Rosskopr, Syracuse University               J. L. ULtman, University of Michigan
   R. G. SANGER, Kansas State College                GILBERT ULMER, University of Kansas
   A. C. ScHAEFFER, Purdue University                R.S. UNDERWOOD, Texas Technological College
   Epita R. SCHNECKENBURGER, University of           W. R. Utz, University of Missouri
         Buffalo                                     H. S. VANDIVER, University of Texas
    K. C. Scuraut, University of Dayton              V. J. VARINEAU, University of Wyoming
    NATHAN ScHwID, University of Wyoming             R. W. Veatca, University of Tulsa
    E. J. SHaptro, Brooklyn College                  J. F. WaGner, University of Colorado
    H. C. SHaus, Washington & Jefferson College      Eart WALDEN, New Mexico College of A &
    C. R. SHERER, Texas Christian University               MA
    L. W. SHERIDAN, College of St. Thomas            G. L. WALKER, Cornell University
    StstER M. NicHoLtas ARNOLDY, Marymount           R. J. WALKER, Cornell University
         College                                     J. L. Watsu, Harvard University



q
658                    MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA                  [November,

Lillie C. Walters, University of Colorado        G. M. Win, Cornell University
K. W. Wegner, Carleton College                   R. M. Wincer, University of Washington
A. L. WuiteMAN, University of Southern Cali-     CLEMENT Winston, Department of Commerce
      fornia                                     H. E. Wo re, Indiana University
L. R. Witcox, Illinois Institute of Technology   C.R.Wytie, Jr., University of Utah
F. B. WiLEy, Denison University                  P. M. Younc, Kansas State College
S. S. WiLks, Princeton University                J. H. Zant, Oklahoma A & M College
R. L. Witson, University of Tennessee                                                          AD
                                                                                                ™



   The Association held it sessions on Monday afternoon and Tuesday morning
in Room 201W, Arts Building, with President R. E. Langer presiding. The
Tuesday morning session was held jointly with the Institute of Mathematical
Statistics and the Econometric Society. The Program Committee for the
meeting consisted of S. S. Cairns, chairman, Wladimir Seidel, and C. R. Wylie,
Jr.
                         FIRST SESSION      OF THE ASSOCIATION
    “What Has Happened to Algebraic Geometry ?”, by Professor R. J. Walker,                |
Cornell University.
      “The Problems Section of the Monthly,” by Professor Howard Eves, Oregon
State College.
    “The Monte       Carlo Method,”       by Dr. S. M. Ulam, Los Alamos Scientific
Laboratory.

                       SECOND SESSION OF THE ASSOCIATION
      Symposium: “Mathematical Training for Social Scientists,” with Professor
Jacob Marschak, University of Chicago as Chairman, and Professors R. L.
Anderson, North Carolina State College, T. W. Anderson, Columbia University,
G. C. Evans, University of California, F. L. Griffin, Reed College, Harold Gul-
liksen, Educational Testing Service, Harold Hotelling, University of North
Carolina, William Jaffe, Northwestern University, and G. M. Kuznets, Uni-
versity of California, as participants.
    At the conclusion of the symposium, it was voted that the officers of the
Mathematical Association of America, the Institute of Mathematical Statistics,
and the Econometric Society be requested to appoint a joint committee, in co-
operation with other interested societies, to study the need for better mathe-
matical training of social scientists and the ways and means of improving their
mathematical preparation. It was suggested that this committee report at the
next joint meeting of the three organizations.

                     MEETING OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS
      The Board met on Monday evening in the Southwest Recreation Room of
the Third Dormitory. Twenty-seven members of the Board were present.
   Progress reports were received from several committees. No action was taken
on the matter of proposed translations of publications of the Association into
foreign languages, but the concensus was that everything            possible should   be
    1949]               MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA                              659

    done to encourage the development of mathematics in foreign countries, espe-
    cially in South America.
3      The Board voted to authorize the printing of two new Carus Monographs.
    Number 9 is entitled: “The Theory of Algebraic Numbers” by Harry Pollard
    and number 10 is: “The Arithmetic Theory of Quadratic Forms” by B. W.
    Jones. The Executive and Finance Committees were empowered to act on the
    method of distribution of Monographs 9 and 10.

                          MEETING    OF SECTION SECRETARIES
       A meeting of secretaries of the Sections of the Association was held on Tues-
    day evening in the Southwest Lounge. Twenty-two of the twenty-five Sections
    were represented.
        The general topic of the meeting was the proposed handbook of instructions
    for Section Secretaries. Many helpful suggestions were made concerning the
    conduct of section meetings. Representatives of several sections reported on
    special projects being carried out by their sections.                                      :

                         MEETINGS OF OTHER ORGANIZATIONS
       The sessions of the American Mathematical Society began on Tuesday after-
    noon and continued through Friday afternoon. Professor G. A. Hedlund of Yale
    University delivered the Colloquium lectures on “Topological Dynamics.” Pro-
    fessor B. Jessen of the University of Copenhagen spoke on “Some recent in-
    vestigations in almost periodic functions” and Professor F. B. Jones of the Uni-
    versity of Texas spoke on “Aposyndetic and non-aposyndetic continua.”
        The Institute of Mathematical Statistics held its sessions from Monday after-
    noon through Thursday afternoon.
        Sessions of the Econometric Society began on Monday morning and con-
    tinued through Friday morning.
       From Monday through Thursday, the Ninth Summer Meeting of the Na-
    tional Council   of Teachers    of Mathematics    was       held at the University    of
    Denver in Denver, Colorado. Many members of the Council and of the Associa-
    tion took advantage of this opportunity to attend the summer meetings of both
    organizations.

                ARRANGEMENTS,       ENTERTAINMENT       AND RECREATION
       The New Dormitory Group of the University of Colorado was available to
    all attending the meeting and to their families. Meals were served in the dining
    halls of the Third Dormitory.                           .
       On Tuesday     afternoon    a tea for the visiting mathematicians        and their
    families was given at the President’s house by the ladies of the mathematics
    departments.
        On Wednesday afternoon an excursion was held along the Trail Ridge Road
    in Rocky Mountain National Park to the Museum and Store at Fall River Pass.
    Supper was eaten at Glacier Basin Camp Ground.
660                MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA               [November,          1
    On Thursday evening a steak fry was held on Flagstaff Mountain. After-
wards the group gathered in the amphitheatre on the top of the mountain over-
looking the University and the city of Boulder. Professor C. A. Hutchinson acted
                                                                                         q
as master of ceremonies. Vice-President W. F. Dyde greeted the guests on be-
half of the University of Colorado. Dr. C. V. Newsom responded on behalf of
the four organizations. A telegram from Professor A. J. Kempner was read ex-             ir



                                                                                         ti
pressing his regrets at being unable to be present at the meeting and the group
voted to send Professor Kempner a telegram of greetings and best wishes. Mr.
A. B. Patterson, Episcopal student chaplain at the University of Colorado, led
the singing and sang several solos.
    At the conclusion of Dr. Newsom’s talk, a motion was enthusiastically
adopted expressing appreciation to the University of Colorado for the hospitality
it had extended to the visitors, and thanking all those who had given so gener-
ously of their time in making the meetings such a noteworthy success. Special
mention was made of the members of the departments of Mathematics and of
Applied Mathematics, and of the Committee on Arrangements, and finally of
C. A. (Hutch) Hutchinson, himself, “who had done everything from endorsing
checks to ringing the dinner bell.”
                                       H. M. Geuman, Secretary-Treasurer

        THE MARCH MEETING       OF THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST        SECTION
    The third annual meeting of the Pacific Northwest Section of the Mathe-
matical Association of America was held at Oregon State College, Corvallis, on
Friday and Saturday, March 25-26, 1949.
    Eighty-five persons attended, including the following fifty-seven members
of the Association: Jessie V. Allhands, Tyler Allhands, H. A. Antosiewicz, R. A.
Beaumont, R. F. Bell, S. E. Boselly, L. G. Butler, W. B. Caton, Richard
Cebula, Paul Civin, C. L. Clark, C. M. Cramlet, J. H. Curtiss, Douglas Derry,
W. W. Dolan, J. L. Ericksen, H. W. Eves, K. S. Ghent, E. G. Goman, F. L.
                                                                                     |
Griffin, S. G. Hacker, V. E. Hoggatt, Jr., H. H. Irwin, S. A. Jennings, J. M.
Kingston, W. J. Kirkham, Celia E. Klotz, M. S. Knebelman, J. C. R. Li, J. J,
Livers, A. T. Lonseth, R. E. Lowney, C. F. Luther, L. H. McFarlan, W. E.
Milne, A. F. Moursund, B. N. Moyls, D. C. Murdoch, Ivan Niven, Andrewa
R. Noble, T. G. Ostrom, T. S. Peterson, A. R. Poole, H. F. Price, R. A. Rosen-       &




baum, R. B. Saunders, W. G. Scobert, W. L. Shepherd, W. H. Simons, M. C.             i
Stippes, W. M. Stone, D. B. Tillotson, J. R. Vatnsdal, G. A. Williams, L. B.
Williams, R. M. Winger, F. E. Wood.
    At the business meeting of the Section the following officers were elected for
the year 1949-50: Chairman, R. M. Winger, University of Washington; Vice-
Chairman, A. F. Moursund, University of Oregon; Secretary-Treasurer, S. G.
Hacker, State College of Washington. The Section voted to accept the invita-
                                                                                     |
tion of the University of Washington to hold the next annual meeting in Seattle
in the spring of 1950.
    The Friday afternoon session was opened by Professor W. E. Milne, Chair-
1949]                      MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA                                     661

man of the Section, and Professor Moursund was invited by him to preside. By
invitation the two papers by Professors Eves and Rosenbaum were assigned
twenty minutes and each was followed by an interesting discussion. Subse-
quently, on motion of Professor Eves, a representative committee from this
Section, with Professor Rosenbaum as chairman, was appointed to extend and
implement the suggestions made in Professor Rosenbaum’s paper; these sugges-
tions are outlined below in the abstract of his paper. Professor C. M. Cramlet,
University of Washington, delivered the annual invited hour address, the title
being On Algebraic and Differential Invariant Theory.
    Following the business meeting on Friday night Professor H. H. Irwin,
State College of Washington, gave a report of the findings of the Committee on
Improvements in Qualifications of Mathematics Teachers in Secondary Educa-
tion in the Pacific Northwest. This committee was appointed last year by this
Section, and it was asked to continue to serve for the year 1949-50. Professor
    Irwin reported on the results of three surveys conducted by his committee: (1)
    the requirements of Pacific Northwest institutions for a bachelor’s degree in
    mathematics or for a degree in education with a major or minor in mathematics;
    (2) undergraduate mathematics courses considered by college instructors and
    by secondary school teachers to be helpful to the latter in their subsequent teach-
    ing; (3) the amount of college training in mathematics required by each of the
    forty-eight states in order for a secondary school teacher to qualify to teach
    mathematics in its accredited secondary schools.
        On Saturday morning the newly elected Chairman, Professor Winger, in-
    vited Professors Griffin and Knebelman to preside. Dr. J. H. Curtiss of the Na-
    tional Applied Mathematics Laboratories, National Bureau of Standards, read
    an invited paper on The Mathematical Programs of the National Bureau of Stand-
    ards. Dr. Curtiss spoke regarding the background, administration, and certain
    objectives of the Laboratories.
        The first eight of the following papers, including Professor Cramlet’s address,
    were presented at the Friday afternoon session. The other thirteen papers, were
    read on Saturday morning.
        1. A sum transformation, by Professor W. M. Stone, Oregon State College.

|       A sum transformation, defined by

                                     LF(kh) =          F(nh)(1 + sh)
                                                 n=O


    where k is a positive integer and / and s are arbitrary complex parameters, reduces to the classical
    Laplace transformation when |h|—0, kh—+t. Various properties of the sum transformation were
    given, together with applications to the solution of difference equations, particularly those which
    arise by replacing differential operators by difference operators.

        2. Weighted trigonometric interpolation, by Professor Paul Civin, University
    of Oregon.
         For a continuous function f(x), a comparison was made between the convergence behavior of
    the set of trigonometric polynomials of order m which take the values f(x!) at x= 2xi/(2n-+1), and




                                                                       bd
              662                      MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA                           [November,

              the set which takes values                                                                                   ch

                                             x(n)         +         + [1 —        fxn)
                                                                                  ]
              at
      :
                    3. A parametric treatment of polar tangent curves, by Professor R. M. Winger,
              University of Washington.                                                                                |
                                                                                                                       |

                   These curves have been studied by Stratton, utilizing mainly polar coordinates, in this
              MonrTBRLY, vol. 43 (1936), p. 398. Professor Winger derived a compact parametric representation,
              permitting the use of the technique for dealing with rational curves, and he obtained and employed
              to advantage the collineation groups which leave the curves invariant.                                       r

                 4, The rank of a curve of real order 3 in 3-space, by Professor Douglas Derry,
              University of British Columbia.
                   Denoting by C; a closed curve in real projective 3-space which is cut by a plane in at most
              three real points, for each point of which a tangent and osculating plane are defined, the author
              proved the rank of C; to be 4. An extension of the proof toa C, was indicated.

                    5. An experiment in intellectual stimulation of gifted high school students, by
                                                                                                                           @
              Professor L. B. Williams, Reed College.
                   During the past year members of the staff of the Science Division of Reed College have given
              monthly lectures on scientific subjects, followed by discussions, to a group of about sixty Portland
              high school students selected on the basis of scientific aptitude and interest. Professor Williams re-
              ported on the way in which students were selected and the lecture subjects, together with a partial
              evaluation of the response and the results.                                                              |

                    6. Invited Annual Address: On algebraic and differential invariant theory, by
              Professor C. M. Cramlet, University of Washington.
                   Professor Cramlet traced the development of the theory of algebraic invariants from the early
              formal theory to the theory of group representations. It was explained that the latter provides an
              abstract basis on which the foundations of tensor algebra are securely built, algebraic invariant
              theory becoming an aspect of tensor algebra, and differential invariant theory a natural extension
      :       from the theory of algebraic forms to the theory of differential forms.

                    7. Some unsolved “elementary” problems submitted to the Monthly, by Professor
              H. W. Eves, Oregon State College.
                    The Elementary Problem Department of this MONTHLY made its first appearance in the
              October 1932 issue, and has since published over 850 proposals. It is interesting that among the
              first 800 of these problems there are eight for which no solutions have been received, thirteen for
              which only partial solutions have been received, and nine which contain unanswered related ques-
              tions raised either by a solver or by the editor. The problem numbers of the proposals in the respec-
              tive groups are: (1) E 9, E 28, E 518, E 534, E 570, E 585, E 604, E 774; (2) E 185, E 208, E 246,
              E 379, E 410, E 442, E 496, E 590, E 708, E 735, E 764, E 765, E 777; (3) E 400, E 401, E 476,
              E 644, E 696, E 724, E 747, E 750, E 791. Professor Eves’ paper was devoted to a discussiun of
              selected problems from this list.

                 8. Discussion of a problem book of a particular type, by Professor R. A. Rosen-
              baum, Reed College.
                   Professor Rosenbaum suggested that this Section might possibly be interested in the compila-
              tion of a small book of serious problems of definite mathematical content which could prove a
                                                                                                                           |




          \
prs
                                                                                                                    ry,           5




    ’         1949]                   MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA                                    663

              challenge and a stimulating experience to undergraduates of ability in the course of their study of
              mathematics. The speaker gave several interesting illustrations of the types of problems which he
              has in mind.

                   9. Note on formal integration, by Professor F. L. Griffin, Reed College.
                                                                                                                          4
                   Professor Griffin called attention to systematic elementary procedures for integrating certain
              expressions of the types considered by H. F. MacNeish in this MoNnTBLY, vol. 56 (1949), p. 25.

’                  10. On the integral solutions of the Diophantine equations x*—y? =at*, y?—3*
              =al*, by Mr. Joseph Irwin, Portland, Oregon, introduced by Professor Griffin,
              read by title.

                 11. On the number of primitive \-roots mod m, by Professor D. C. Murdoch,
              University of British Columbia.
                   Professor Murdoch stated that in an unpublished paper H. Griffin and B. Sussman have
              solved the problem of finding the number of primitive \-roots modulo a composite integer m,
              and he gave the following alternative formula obtained by group theoretic methods. If
,             m=         -    pr, where po=2 and pi,      , pp are distinct odd primes, the number of primitive
              d roots mod m is




              where the product extends over all prime divisors g; of ¢(m), go=2, and the numbers »; are defined
|       |
              as follows: (a) if e9 $2 and gt is the highest power of g; which divides any of the numbers ¢(p;°),
                        + + ,       then »; is the number of these numbers which are divisible by     (b) if eg>2
              and g* is the highest power of g; which divides any one of the numbers 2, 4 $(%°), (1), ---,
              ¢(p*"), then »; is the number of these numbers which are divisible by qi.

                 12. Hilbert’s geometric postulates as theorems, by Miss Patricia M. Cowan,
              Reed College, introduced by Professor Griffin.
                   Miss Cowan, a student at Reed College, discussed the possible deduction of Hilbert’s postu-
              lates for geometry from the Pieri postulates. Mimeographed copies of the Pieri definitions and
              postulates were distributed in order to facilitate the discussion.

                 13. Numerical treatment of the Laplacian operator, by Professor W. E. Milne,
        4     Oregon State College and The Institute for Numerical Analysis.
                Given a plane harmonic function U(x, y) and its values U; at the nodes of a square mesh,
          formulas were obtained, with bounds for the error, for the approximate representation of the
          first and second order partial derivatives of U(x, y), for interpolation on curvilinear boundaries,
        | and for the Laplacian operator. These formulas were expressed in terms of linear combinations of
          the U; at a suitable pattern of nodal points.

                  14. Some elementary problems in probability, by Professor Ivan Niven, Univer-                               a
              sity of Oregon.
                   Several examples were given to show that books on college algebra could use problems on
              probability of the continuous type as well as the usual problems of the discrete type. For example,
              it might be asked, what is the probability that the distance between two points taken at random on
              the boundary of a unit square be greater than some constant which could either be specified
              numerically or left as a parameter.
    664                     MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA                          [November,
j
        15. The mathematical programs of the National Bureau of Standards, by Dr.
    J. H. Curtiss, National Applied Mathematics Laboratories, National Bureau of
    Standards.                                                                                             Li

        16. Rigidity of Lennes polyhedra, by Professor H. W. Eves, Oregon State
    College.
         Cauchy has shown that every simple closed convex polyhedral surface is rigid. To date it is
    unknown whether there exist simple closed non-convex polyhedral surfaces which are non-rigid.
    A Lennes polyhedron is a simple closed polyhedral surface with triangular faces and such that the
    line segment joining any two vertices not on a common edge lies either wholly or partly outside
    the volume bounded by the surface. Such polyhedra are known to be non-convex. The author
    stated that from paper models of Lennes polyhedra one might be led to conjecture that such poly-
    hedral surfaces are non-rigid, for they seem to possess a fair range of mobility. However it was the
    purpose of this paper to show that this apparent motion is accompanied by small distortions of the
                                                                                                           oO
    faces and that the polyhedra are really rigid.

        17. A recursion relation involving exponentials, by Mr. Daniel Drew, Reed
    College, introduced by Professor Rosenbaum.
        Mr. Drew, a student at Reed College, obtained a general solution of lim un, un =a“n-1, Up =o,       Vv
    and applied the result to the problem of lim dp, vn =a"""1, v9 =do.
                                                                                                            li
       18. An application of Laplace integrals to Hankel functions, by Professor
    W. B. Caton, State College of Washington.                                                               a

         Using the principle of rotation of the path of integration of a Laplace integral, together with
    Abelian theorems for these integrals, the author obtained representations and formulas of the
    Hankel functions valid in appropriate half-planes. In particular, the expressions for H{? (ze?**)
                                                                                                            f
    and H®(ze**‘) involving Laplace integrals were exhibited.

       19. Sample size for Wilks’ tolerance limits, by Professors Z. W. Birnbaum,
    and H. S. Zuckerman, University of Washington, read by title.
                                                                                                           |s
       20. Some consequences of a well-known theorem on conics, by Professor R. A.
    Rosenbaum, Reed College, and Mr. Joseph Rosenbaum, The Milford School.
         This paper, which was concerned with a generalization of the Desargues involution theorem
    and a porism related to Steiner’s theorem on chains of tangent circles, was read by title at the
    authors’ generous suggestion in view of the limited time left available.

        21. The Canadian congress on applied mathematics, Vancouver, 1949, by Pro-
    fessor S. A. Jennings, University of British Columbia.
         Professor Jennings gave a brief account of the extensive scientific and social arrangements
    which have been made for the Congress, and extended a cordial invitation to the members of this
    section to attend.
                                                                      S. G. Hacker, Secretary

                   THE APRIL MEETING OF THE SOUTHWESTERN                       SECTION
        The ninth annual meeting of the Southwestern Section of the Mathematical
    Association of America was held at New Mexico College of A. & M. A., State
    College, New Mexico, April 29 and 30, 1949. Professor Earl Walden, chairman
    of the Section, presided.
          1949]                  MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA                                     665

Pe            The attendance was forty-one including the following twenty-three members
f     §   of the Association: J. W. Beach, A. W. Boldyreff, C. R. Buell, J. H. Butchart,
      a
          Louise H. Chin, W. W. Denton, Ruth A. Fish, F. C. Gentry, R. F. Graesser,
          Rose A. Grundman, W. P. Heinzman, R. C. Hildner, P. F. Hultquist, H. D.
e
          Huskey, Brother Cyprian Luke, D. C. B. Marsh, E. J. Purcell, B. D. Roberts,
          H. P. Rogers, Earl Walden, R. L. Westhafer, Charles Wexler, and D. L. Webb.
              The first forenoon was devoted to a trip to the White Sands Rocket Proving
.
          Grounds, where exhibits, lectures, and motion pictures instructed the group. A                         vie


e
e
          banquet at the Student Union Building was followed by an address, Automatical
          Digital Computing, by Dr. H. D. Huskey, Chief of the Machine Development
          Unit, Institute of Numerical Analysis, University of California at Los Angeles.
e         This lecture was a joint presentation of the Association and the Physical Science
          Laboratory of the host college, Dr. George Gardiner, director.
              At the business session the following officers were elected: Chairman, E. J.
          Purcell, University of Arizona; Vice-Chairman, A. W. Boldyreff, University of
          New Mexico; Visiting Lecturer, J. H. Butchart, Arizona State College. It was
          voted by the Section, upon the request of the delegation from the Texas School
          of Mines, El Paso, Texas, to ask the Board of Governors to change the territorial
          limits of the Southwestern Section to include El Paso, Texas. It was voted to
          invite the members at Lubbock, Texas to join in a similar request.
              The program consisted of the following papers:
>
              1. On the definition of an analytical function of a complex variable, by Pro-
          fessor A. W. Boldyreff, University of New Mexico.

              2. Systems of lines and planes on the quadric hypersurfaces of four and five
          dimensions, by Ruth A. Fish, University of Arizona.
               This was an expository treatment of systems of flat space on quadric primals in projective
          spaces of four and five dimensions.

              3. Postulates of projective algebras, by Louise            H. Chin, University of Ari-
          zona.
              4. Some characteristics of the altitude quadric, by Professor J. H. Butchart,
          Arizona State College.
     BS        The speaker discussed some properties of the hyperboloid of one sheet of which the altitudes of
          a tetrahedron belong to one regulus. In particular, the Monge point is the center of the altitude
          quadric, and the plane section normal to any ruling is an equilateral hyperbola.

             5. A Cremona involution in n-dimensional space, by Professor E. J. Purcell,
          University of Arizona.

              6. Grading and the fluctuations of sampling, by Professor R. F. Graesser, Uni-
          versity of Arizona.
      4
              A population of students with given percentages of A, B, C, D, and E students is assumed.
          From this population classes are drawn as random samples. The fluctuations in their grade dis-
          tribution was exhibited.




                                                                            »
             666                     MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA                            [November,        1

                 7. An application of matrix methods to a recent postulate system for m-valued
             functional calculi, by Professor D. L. Webb, University of Arizona.
                  Professor Webb discussed an application of row matrices to the postulate system of J. B.
             Rosser and A. R. Turquette (Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 13, pp. 177-192). He compared the
             properties of the operators of the 2-valued and the m-valued cases.

                   8. Further analysis of Fermat's congruence for composite moduli, by Professor
             A. W. Boldyreff, University of New Mexico.
                 A method of finding all values of x satisfying the congruence x"-!=1 (mod ), when n isa
         |   product of two odd primes was discussed.

                  9. Interpretation of singular solutions of ordinary differential equations of the
             first order by geometric means, by Professor R. L. Westhafer, New Mexico College
             of A. & M. A.
                  Using the definition of singular and regular line element of the differential equation F(x, y, p)
              =0 as given by E. Kamke, in which the locus in 3-space of F(x, y, 2) =0 is considered, the types of
             loci which give rise to singular line elements are seen to be isolated points and curves and their
             limit points, three dimensional regions of points, intersections of surfaces, and boundary points of
             the projections of the locus on the xy-plane.

                   10. On certain analogies between measure and category, by Manfred Fliess,
             New Mexico College of A. & M. A., introduced by the Secretary.
                 11. On the three dimensional distribution of a bomb, by M. S. Hendrickson,
             University of New Mexico, read by R. C. Hildner.
                 12. A problem in maximum range for rockets, by Keith Guard, New Mexico
             College of A. & M. A., introduced by the Secretary.
                 13. Results of placement tests for sectioning college algebra, by H. P. Rogers,
             University of New Mexico.
                 14. On the high school training in mathematics of our freshmen, by Professor
             Earl Walden, New Mexico College of A. & M. A.                                                            I

                                                                                  B. D. RoBerts, Secretary
                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                      4


                     THE APRIL MEETING          OF THE METROPOLITAN              NEW YORK SECTION
                   The eighth annual meeting of the Metropolitan New York Section of the
             Mathematical Association of America was held at Brooklyn College, Brooklyn,
             New York, on Saturday, April 9, 1949. Professor T. F. Cope, Collegiate Vice-
             Chairman of the Section presided at the morning session, and Professor R. A.
             Johnson, Chairman of the Section, presided at the afternoon session.
                   One hundred and twenty-five persons attended the sessions, including the
             following seventy-three members of the Association: Brother Bernard Alfred,
ie
             R. G. Archibald, H. C. Ayres, Frances E. Baker, Samuel Borofsky, C. B. Boyer,
     i
             A. D. Bradley, Benjamin Braverman, Paul Brock, A. B. Brown, Jewell Hughes
             Bushey, Hobart Bushey, Margaret C. Byrne, John Clark, T. F. Cope, J. E.
             Darraugh, J. G. Deutsch, I. A. Dodes, J. N. Eastham, J. E. Eaton, Samuel Ei-
        1949]                  MATHEMATICAL ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA                                     667
                                                                                                                          =




        lenberg, Carolyn Eisele, J. M. Feld, Edward Fleisher, R. M. Foster, Marion C.
        Gray, Harriet Griffin, George Grossman, G. C. Helme, T. R. Humphreys,
        Solomon Hurwitz, L. C. Hutchinson, R. A. Johnson, Aida Kalish, L. S. Kenni-
    x   son, H. S. Kieval, M. S. Klamkin, Edna Kramer-Lassar, A. W. Landers, J. A.
        Larrivee, Nathan Lazar, A. A. LePori, M. E. Levenson, Emanuel Levine,
        May H. Maria, F. H. Miller, L. T. Moore, A. J. Mortola, D. S. Nathan, C. V.
        Newsom, M. A. Nordgaard, P. B. Norman, Walter Prenowitz, James Quinn,
        R. M. Reed, Moses Richardson, G. J. Ross, S. G. Roth, C. T. Salkind, Arthur
        Schack, Harry Schor, Aaron Shapiro, Edward Shapiro, James Singer, F. E.
        Smith, E. R. Stabler, Mildred M. Sullivan, Nelly Ullman, Israel Wallach, Alan
                                                                                                                      :
        Wayne, J. M. Wolfe, Margaret Y. Woodbridge, H. J. Zimmerberg.
           The officers elected at the business meeting were: Chairman, B. P. Gill, The
>                                                                                                               7




        City College of the College of the City of New York; Collegiate Vice-Chairman,
        L. F. Ollman, Hofstra College; High School Vice-Chairman, Alan Wayne, Brook-
        lyn High School of Automotive Trades; Secretary, James Singer, Brooklyn
        College; Treasurer, Aaron Shapiro, Midwood                 High School. The ninth annual
        meeting will be held in the Spring of 1950.
            The following papers were presented:
’
            1. Address of welcome, by Dr. W. R. Gaede, Dean of Faculty, Brooklyn
        College.
            2. Generalizations of the law of cosines, by Professor L. W. Cohen, Queens
        College (introduced by Professor T. F. Cope).
            3. Interference patterns in the teaching of mathematics, by Dr. Nathan Lazar,
        Bureau of Reference, Research and Statistics, Board of Education, New York
        City.
’           Experienced teachers of mathematics will not let a homework assignment consist of one
        type of exercise only, but will choose examples of each of several types. Nevertheless it is a common
        practice when introducing a topic to present only one aspect and to give almost exclusive drill on
        examples illustrating that new topic before any other topic is presented, no matter how closely
        related these topics may be.
)
             This writer claims that the repetition of even one exercise without any significant variation in
        its pattern tends to encourage the student to perform mathematical operations without insight
        and understanding, and to make adventitious and unjustifiable inductions from the “model exam-
        ple” worked out. Further repetition of the same pattern will encourage the student to believe in
        the correctness of his procedure, and make it harder for him to adjust himself to a new type of         Fay


        the same pattern where his ad hoc hypothesis will not work.
>            It is therefore recommended that the successive presentation of examples illustrating the
        same mathematical concept be so varied as to prevent the formation of undesirable associations.
,
        This approach may not yield the immediate feeling of success that the traditional one gives. It
        may even require at first more time and more careful preparation than one is accustomed to.
        This effort will, however, be justified by the end result—a real understanding of the nature of
,       mathematical operations, of the purposes underlying them, and of the mathematical laws govern-
        ing them.

}           4. The indebtedness of Greek to Babylonian exact sciences, by Professor O. Neu-
        gebauer, Brown University (introduced by Professor T. F. Cope).
             In 1928 J. K. Fotheringham published in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society




                                                                                t
    668                           CALENDAR     OF FUTURE      MEETINGS

    an article on The Indebtedness of Greek to Chaldean Astronomy. In discussing this subject twenty
    years later, we can add Babylonian mathematics to the comparison. The vast increase of material
    has also considerably contributed to the complication of the problem and to the realization that
    there are huge gaps in our records. Greek and demotic papyri show that Babylonian arithmetical
    methods were used simultaneously with the geometrical astronomical models of Hipparchus and
    Ptolemy. Babylonian algebra developed methods which are paralleled in Greek “geometrical
    algebra.” Babylonian number theory shows a development previously assumed to be “Pythago-
    rean.” The “Pythagorean” theorem was used a thousand years before Pythagoras. Yet it is very
    difficult to indicate the process by which these discoveries were transmitted to the Greeks. Theo-
    retical astronomy still remains the only field where we are able tosee some points of direct contact
    between Greek and Babylonian science.

          5. Some educational trends in New York State and their significance to the
    mathematicians, by Dr. C. V. Newsom, Assistant Commissioner for Higher Edu-
    cation, University of State of New York.
         This paper discussed some of the trends in education on all levels in New York State. Par-        a
    ticular attention was given to the new program for the training of elementary and secondary
    teachers, the development of the new syllabus in mathematics for the secondary level, and the
    expanded program anticipated by the State in the field of higher education. The report contained           |
    many personal observations as the result of the author’s actual visitation of institutions.

                                                                      JAMES SINGER, Secretary
                                                                                                           a
                                CALENDAR       OF FUTURE      MEETINGS
          Thirty-third Annual Meeting, New York City, December 30, 1949.
          International Congress of Mathematicians, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
    August 30-September 6, 1950.
        The following is a list of the Sections of the Association with dates of future
    meetings so far as they have been reported to the Secretary.
    ALLEGHENY MounrtaAIN                               NorTHERN CALiForniA, Berkeley, January 28,
               Southern Illinois University, Carbon-        1950.
         dale, May 12-13, 1950.                        Onto, Denison University, Granville, April 22,
    INDIANA, Wabash        College, Crawfordsville,         1950.
         April 29, 1950.                               OKLAHOMA
    Iowa, State University of Iowa, Iowa City,         Paciric NortHWEsT, University of Washing-
         April 21-22, 1950.                                 ton, Seattle, June, 1950.
    Kansas, Spring, 1950.                              PHILADELPHIA, Haverford College, November
                                                                                                           |
    KEnTucky, University of Kentucky, Lexing-               26, 1949.
         ton, April 29, 1950.                          Rocky Mountain, University of Denver, April,
                                Centenary College,          1950.
         Shreveport, Louisiana, Spring, 1950.          SOUTHEASTERN, University of Florida, Gaines-
|
|
    MARYLAND-DistTRICT OF COLUMBIA-VIRGINIA,               ville, March, 1950.
]
         Fall, 1949,                                   SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA, Immaculate Heart
{
    METROPOLITAN NEw York, Spring, 1950.                    College, Hollywood, March 11, 1950.
    MIcHIGAN, March, 1950.                             SOUTHWESTERN, Spring, 1950.
:
    Minnesota, Macalaster College, St. Paul, May       Texas, Abilene, Spring, 1950.
         6, 1950.                                      Upper NEw York STATE, Syracuse University,
    Missour!, Spring, 1950.                                Spring, 1950.
    NesBrRaSKA, Nebraska Wesleyan University,          Wisconsin, Marquette University, Milwaukee,
         Lincoln, May 6, 1950.                             May, 1950.


:
         Recent and forthcoming math texts

                FIRST-YEAR                 MATHEMATICS                         FOR
                 COLLEGES                                     By Paul R. Rider
    '      In this new Rider book, the methods of presentation are those used in the same
           author’s College Algebra, Plane and Spherical Trigonometry, and Analytic Geom-
           etry, with the three subjects presented as separate divisions. Arranged logically,
           with topics grouped around the function concept, the book is nevertheless adapta-
           ble to courses using a different sequence. Published in September. $5.00



=
_
            A SHORT                COURSE             IN DIFFERENTIAL
            EQUATIONS                                          By Earl D. Rainville
           Designed for students who have completed the standard calculus course, this new
    8      book emphasizes the careful development and execution of methods for solving
           differential equations. More than nine hundred carefully constructed exercises
’

           are included. Published in June. $3.00
4




                          PLANE            AND         SPHERICAL
                 TRIGONOMETRY                                 Moses Richardson                           ig




           This text presents a full treatment of the subject, adaptable to long or short
           courses with various emphases. Stress is placed on logical thinking and its useful-
    ae                                                                                               4

           ness in trigonometry throughout. Clear reviews of background material essential
           to the course are provided. To be published in the winter.


                                                                                                     2



                             THE MACMILLAN COMPANY                                               :



=                            60 Fifth Avenue, New York 11, N.Y.
]
     |




                                                                                              CLI
                                                                                             Tie)



                               Wilson and Tracey's
qi                                                                                               N




                       ANALYTIC GEOMETRY
{             pe
                            THIRD EDITION
                   Here is the new, up-to-date edition (1949) of a
          :        highly successful text. Featuring: a complete new | cH
         iy        format, with larger, more open pages; revised and |
                   enlarged diagrams; problems revised in keeping                            ‘
                   with the work to be covered; large, clear headings;
                   and minor corrections throughout.
                                                                 328 pages. $2.75


                                                                                                 Un


                                 D. C. HEATH        AND     COMPANY
                   Boston   New York   Chicago   Atlanta   San Francisco   Dallas   London
a            CLIFFORD BELL, University of California, Los Angeles
             LOVINCY J. ADAMS, Santa Monica City College



             Marematics                                          OF FINANCE
                                               Combined Edition including
                                               COMMERCIAL                ALGEBRA
                   This one-volume integration of two texts is designed primarily for the full year course. The
                   treatment of commercial algebra in the first part is directed specifically toward the training in
                   the mathematics of finance of the second part. The volume is of special interest for its many
                   excellent tables and wealth of problems.
     |             “This is a well-written book which should appeal to the students because of its clarity of presenta-
                   tion, omission of ‘sub-cases,’ and Personalization of the problems. The use of the line diagram
                   has been wisely emphasized. It is good to have included modern material in the use of the
                   CSO mortality tables, the values ini the commutation tables reckoned at 244%, and the use of or-
         é         dinary commercial notation in the description of bonds..
                                                                           —Julia ‘Wells Bower,                 College
                   MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE, Combisaed Edition—1949—568 pages—$3.90
         :         COMMERCIAL ALGEBRA—1949—245 pages—$2.75
a        ;         MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE—1949—263 pages—$2.75
     f

W    | CHARLES                H. SISAM,           Colorado College



g                               ANALYTIC GEOMETRY
35                                                       Revised Edition
                   Widely used in its first edition, this new volume has been modified according to suggestions from
                   a         experience. An important change is the treatment of polar coordinates in a separate
                      pter.
>)                 “A brief but excellent treatment of the essentials of Analytics. An excellent set of well-graded
                   examples. Good diagrams and a pleasing book to read.”
                                                                                  —James Singer, Brooklyn College
                   1949—304 pages—$2.40


              EDWARD A. CAMERON and EDWARD T. BROWNE
             | University of North Carolina
                                                                                                                          »




                                                         CoLtEcE ALGEBRA
                   Designed as a text for courses in al    a at the college freshman level, this book aims to give
                   the student a clear understanding of fundamental principles.
om
                   “The text impresses me very favorably. The introductory and review material are especially well
                   done. I was pleased to see the concept of ‘principal root’ merit special attention; also the
                   treatment of scientific notation.”
                                                                          —Francis G. O’Brien, Fordham University
                   1949—406 pages—$3.00

               HENR                       AND                                       257 Fourth A
4        ;              ¥     HOLT                  COMPANY                         New York 10,NY.
        t




                5 diversified new books-
        1


                  each with an unusual theme
        1                                                                                       1




                       HIGHER ALGEBRA FOR THE UNDERGRADUATE
                By Marie J. Weiss. An introduction to some simpler algebraic concepts.
                Groups, rings, fields, ideals, and matrices given equal coverage with the       1
                theory of equations. Minimum number of ideas introduced at one time             1




        4       to avoid confusion; examples and exercises throughout. 1949. 165 pages.
                Illus. $3.75

                         THE MATHEMATICS OF CIRCUIT ANALYSIS
                By Ernst A. Guillemin. One of the Principles of Electrical Engineering          1

        J       Series. A variety of methods and principles for a thorough understanding        1

                of electrical network theory. Designed to fit a higher mathematics course       1
        1       for those lacking strong mathematical background. Covers topics in ad-
                vanced algebra, vector analysis, Fourier series and integrals.   A Technology
                Press Book. 1949. 590 pages. Illus. $7.50
                THE EXTRAPOLATION, INTERPOLATION, AND SMOOTH-
4
                       ING OF STATIONARY TIME SERIES WITH                                       J

        1                   ENGINEERING APPLICATIONS
        1
                By Norbert Wiener. The first stage of the statistical viewpoint in com-
        '       munication engineering presented by fusing the techniques of the statisti-
                cian and the communication engineer into a common one more effective
                than either alone. Specific problems of the design of linear predictors and
        1       linear wave filters. A Technology Press Book. 1949. 163 pages. $4.00

            '
                            ANALYTIC GEOMETRY AND CALCULUS:                                         1
                                          A Unified Treatment
                By Frederic H. Miller. A correlation of the two subjects into a single
                branch of mathematical analysis. Summary after each chapter listing
                                                                                                    1
            t
                                                                                                    1
                principal concepts, definitions, theorems, and methods in that chapter.
    :
                3,025 problems, many illustrative examples. 1949. 658 pages. Illus. $5.00           1



                                     DIFFERENTIAL        EQUATIONS
                By Harry W. Reddick. Methods of solving ordinary differential equations
                and problems in applied mathematics involving ordinary differential
                equations. All theoretical principles introduced are later applied to actual
            1
                problems. 2nd Ed., 1949. 288 pages. Illus. $3.00

            '
                                       Copies obtainable on approval.                               1

            1   JOHN WILEY & SONS, Inc., 440-4th Ave., New York 16, N.Y.
1



         THE GEOMETRY OF THE ZEROS OF A
        POLYNOMIAL IN A COMPLEX VARIABLE
                  By MORRIS MARDEN
                            American Mathematical Society
1                            Mathematical Surveys No. 3
'
                                  x + 183 pp. $5.00

      A detailed exposition on the location of the zeros of a polynomial in a
    complex variable. Useful not only to the specialist in this branch of function
    theory, but also to the applied mathematician and engineer. Of interest
    to the general mathematical reader as the book contains some relatively new,
1
    analytic and geometric material which, though derived by essentially ele-
    mentary methods, is not readily available elsewhere.                               %



                                      Order from

          AMERICAN        MATHEMATICAL    SOCIETY
    531 West 116th Street         New York 27, N.Y., U.S.A.
                                                                                                ;




    For the First Year—


          SMAIL’S
'
1

1
                                              CALCULUS
                                                                                           Ps
              HERE is an elementary text on calculus, well planned, integrated,
           lucid. Note what enthusiastic teachers have said:

1
H      —“Professor Smail has produced an excellent book on Calculus.”
                                        H. P. Evans, University of Wisconsin
       —“Exceptionally complete for an elementary text. Groundwork in Chapter I
          especially well done. Method of introducing definite integral—excellent.”
                                          John L. Baker, University of Cincinnati          2
       —“Well written text—plenty of problems—like the use of a Theorem of Bliss
1
          instead of Duhamel’s Theorem in derivation of some integrals.”
                                    . Walter O. Gordon, Pennsylvania State College
                                                                               $4.50

    APPLETON-CENTURY-CROFTS,                                       INC.
!   35 West 32nd Street                                 New York |, New York
                                                                                                                  q

      4


                  i



                                                                                                                                   |




                                            Important Pitman Joxts
                                                                                                                              ga


                                                                                                                              1




                      MATHEMATICS FOR
                      FINANCE AND ACCOUNTING
                                                                                                                              4




                           By J. BRUCE COLEMAN, formerly of the University of South Carolina, and
                           WILLIAM O. ROGERS, Pennsylvania State College. 310 pages, $4.00.
                           By correlating mathematics with accounting and business administration
                           courses, this text provides a new approach to the subject. It contains the latest
                                                                                                                              |
  ‘                        mortality tables, review exercises, and problems.
              :



                      PROJECTIVE AND
                      ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY
                           By J. A. TODD, Cambridge University. 289 pages, $4.50.
                           “This is an accurate and readable account. . . . The final and most original
                           chapter is probably the best account ever written of the invariants and covari-            q
                           ants of quadratic forms, and of their geometrical interpretation in terms of
          :
Wage                       conics and quadratics. ... A special feature of the book is the vast number
                           of exercises.”—Mathematical Reviews.


                      THEORY AND USE OF THE
                      COMPLEX VARIABLE
                            By S. L. GREEN, University of London. NEW SECOND EDITION, 136
                            pages, $3.75.
                            Valuable in physics, aeronautics, and electrical engineering. “Mr. Green has
                            dealt very ably with a difficult subject and his book will be useful to students.
                             . . Well illustrated and contains a number of problems.”—Electrical Review.
 =4                                                                                                                   3




                      REGULAR                POLYTOPES
          7
                            By H. S. M. COXETER, University of Toronto. 321 pages, $10.00.
                            A highly readable study of aspects of the five regular solids, this text presents a
                            number of ideas that have not been published before. It contains eight aed
                            gtaphs of models and about 80 diagrams.
                       TRIGONOMETRIC AND LOGARITHMIC TABLES. By D. E. Bridge, Hamilton
                       Technical Institute. 53 pages, $.60. Five-place tables in pocket size.
                                       You are invited to send for examination copies


                      PITMAN 2'west
                               asth st,New York 19, N.Y.
                                                                                                                          {



per
tes
                                                                                                              4




        3
                ¢


                    COLLEGE ALGEBRA
                    By Moses Richardson, Brooklyn College

    ~       |       By combining      lucid explanation   of procedure with reasonable     motivation   and
                    justification of the processes, this text is suitable for freshman classes with almost
            |                                                                                                     is




                    any degree of preparation. Informal, searching discussions, without oversimplifica-
                    tion, are substituted for proofs too rigorous for the first year level. Many chapters
                    are independent of each other and may be taken in any order desired. Starred
                    sections and problems can be omitted without disturbing the continuity, making
                    the book practicable for a one- or two-semester course.
                    Published 1947                            472 pages                            f2¢

j
                     INTRODUCTION TO COLLEGE
                     MATHEMATICS
            |       By Carroll V. Newsom, Oberlin College

                    The perfect mathematics text for the vast majority of liberal arts students who will
                    take but one college course in mathematics. Written in terms of the student's own
                    interests, the text continually stresses the importance of mathematics in the world
                    of today. Logical reasoning rather than formal drill—the meaning of mathematical
                    ideas instead of mere manipulation of mathematical symbols—is the major tool
                    by which each principle is taught.
                    Published 1946                            344 pages                            vx


            |       ANALYTIC GEOMETRY
            |
                    By David S. Nathan, College of the City of New York; and Olaf
            |       Helmer, Research Mathematician, Douglas Aircraft Co.                                      beg

                    Offering direct preparation for calculus, this text stresses two themes: equations
                    of loci and loci of equations. Every point in the work is clearly and thoroughly
                    explained, particular attention being given to those steps in solution which baffle
                    most students. Particular emphasis is placed on the straight line, higher plane curves,
                    and planes and line in space. An outstanding feature of the text is its helpful
                    photographs of solid geometry models.
                     Published 1947                            402 pages                            Fs


                                              Send for your copies today!




                       PRENTICE-HALL, INC.,
                                                                                                              ‘
                                                                                                                  ;




            PRACTICAL MATHEMATICS. Part |. Arithmetic with Applications
                 By Craupe Irwin              and SAMUEL FLETCHER                    Illinois Institute of
                 Technology. Fifth edition. 175 pages, $1.80
            The publication of Part I. Arithmetic with Applications in a new fifth edition in-
            augurates the revision of Palmer and Bibb’s famous Practical Mathematics. The
            explicit style and simple expositions of previous editions have been retained, but
            the text has been made more adaptable for general use by a somewhat more the-
            oretical and rigorous presentation. The problems have been brought up to date, and
            thought provoking previews have been included throughout the book.
            Fe

            ANALYTIC GEOMETRY
:              By Rosin Rosinson, Dartmouth College. 152 pages, $2.25                                             |

            A brief text for the conventional course in analytic geometry. The author covers the
            more usual materials in plane analytic geometry, built around the study of the
            conic sections as a core; the quadric surfaces play a similar role in the treatment
            of space analytic geometry.

            MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE
                 By Paut M. Hume          and Cuartes L, SEEBECK, JR., University of Alabama.
                 365 pages, $4.00
            A text for the standard mathematics course given to students of business administra-
            tion. In addition to the usual topics, this book has chapters on equations of equiva-
            lence, advanced topics ingeneral annuities, and approximating methods. There is                       :
            ae illustrative material to guide the student in setting up almost every type of
            problem.
    |                                                                                                             |

            THE REAL PROJECTIVE           PLANE
                 By H. S. M. Coxeter, University of Toronto. 198 pages, $3.00
            In this important new textbook an internationally famous geometer presents an in-
            troductory treatment of projective geometry, including a thorough discussion of
            conics and a rigorous presentation of the synthetic approach to coordinates. The
            restriction to real geometry of two dimensions makes it possible for every theorem
            to be adequately represented by a diagram. Emphasis is placed upon the concept
        -
            of correspondence, or transformation, which is fundamental               to all branches of
            mathematics. A special feature is the clear division between the projective, affine, and
            Euclidean geometries,
                                        Send for copies on approval


                              McGRAW-HILL                  BOOK          COMPANY,                     INC.
                                    330 WEST     42no    STREET, NEW             YORK       18, N. Y.             £




                                                      GEORGE BANTA PUBLISHING   COMPANY,   MENASHA,   WISCONSIN
                                                                                  ,PUBLIC           AR‘
                                                                                           Ail
                           THE”“AMERICAN                                                   DETROI
                                  ATICAL MONTHLY
                                  THB OFFICIAL JOURNAL OF

4       THE    MATHEMATICAL                 ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA, INC.



        VOLUME      56                                                NUMBER 10, Part 1
    a



                                           CONTENTS
        The Spaghetti Problem         .     ...       .               .   G.F. Carnizr    669
        A Recurring Theorem on Determinants           .   .   .       .   Oca Taussky     672
        Mathematical Notes        .R. P. AcNew ann R. P. Boas, S. T. ParKer               677             =


        Classroom Notes.      .   .       Gorpon Pati, C. H. Densow, G. Pétya             682
        Elementary Problems and Solutions         .                                       691
        Advanced Problems and Solutions           .                                       695
        Recent Publications       .   .                                                   700
        Clubs and Allied Activities                                                       701
        News and Notices                                                                  704
        Mathematical Association of America                       —                       706
          The April Meeting of the Rocky Mountain Section .                               706             ,



                                                                                          709
          The April Meeting of the Kansas Section .
          Calendar of Future Meetings                                                     711
        Index to Volume 56, 1949 .                                                        ne
        DECEMBER                                                                         1949
