                                            Computability of probability measures and
                                            Martin-Löf randomness over metric spaces


                                                                       Mathieu Hoyrup
                                                 LIENS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris. email: hoyrup@di.ens.fr
arXiv:0709.0907v2 [cs.IT] 23 Jul 2008




                                                                       Cristóbal Rojas
                                        LIENS, Ecole Normale Supérieure and CREA, Ecole Polytechnique, Paris. email:
                                                                       rojas@di.ens.fr



                                        Abstract

                                        In this paper we investigate algorithmic randomness on more general spaces than
                                        the Cantor space, namely computable metric spaces. To do this, we first develop a
                                        unified framework allowing computations with probability measures. We show that
                                        any computable metric space with a computable probability measure is isomorphic
                                        to the Cantor space in a computable and measure-theoretic sense. We show that
                                        any computable metric space admits a universal uniform randomness test (without
                                        further assumption).


                                        Key words: Computability, computable metric spaces, computable measures,
                                        Kolmogorov complexity, algorithmic randomness, randomness tests.




                                        1    Introduction


                                        The theory of algorithmic randomness begins with the definition of individual
                                        random infinite sequence introduced in 1966 by Martin-Löf [1]. Since then,
                                        many efforts have contributed to the development of this theory which is now
                                        well established and intensively studied, yet restricted to the Cantor space. In
                                        order to carry out an extension of this theory to more general infinite objects
                                        as encountered in most mathematical models of physical random phenomena,
                                        a necessary step is to understand what means for a probability measure on a
                                        1   partly supported by ANR Grant 05 2452 260 ox


                                        Preprint submitted to Information and Computation
general space to be computable (this is very simple expressed on the Cantor
Space). Only then algorithmic randomness can be extended.

The problem of computability of (Borel) probability measures over more gen-
eral spaces has been investigated by several authors: by Edalat for compact
spaces using domain-theory ([2]); by Weihrauch for the unit interval ([3]) and
by Schröder for sequential topological spaces ([4]) both using representations;
and by Gács for computable metric spaces ([5]). Probability measures can be
seen from different points of view and those works develop, each in its own
framework, the corresponding computability notions. Mainly, Borel probabil-
ity measures can be regarded as points of a metric space, as valuations on open
sets or as integration operators. We express the computability counterparts of
these different views in a unified framework, and show them to be equivalent.

Extensions of the algorithmic theory of randomness to general spaces have
previously been proposed: on effective topological spaces by Hertling and
Weihrauch (see [6],[7]) and on computable metric spaces by Gács (see [5]),
both of them generalizing the notion of randomness tests and investigating
the problem of the existence of a universal test. In [7], to prove the existence
of such a test, ad hoc computability conditions on the measure are required,
which a posteriori turn out to be incompatible with the notion of computable
measure. The second one ([5]), carrying the extension of Levin’s theory of ran-
domness, considers uniform tests which are tests parametrized by measures.
A computability condition on the basis of ideal balls (namely, recognizable
Boolean inclusions) is needed to prove the existence of a universal uniform
test.

In this article, working in computable metric spaces with any probability mea-
sure, we consider both uniform and non-uniform tests and prove the following
points:

• uniformity and non-uniformity do not essentially differ,
• the existence of a universal test is assured without any further condition.

Another issue addressed in [5] is the characterization of randomness in terms of
Kolmogorov Complexity (a central result in Cantor Space). There, this char-
acterization is proved to hold (for a compact computable metric space X with
a computable measure) under the assumption that there exists a computable
injective encoding of a full-measure subset of X into binary sequences. In the
real line for example, the base-two numeral system (or binary expansion) con-
stitutes such encoding for the Lebesgue measure. This fact was already been
(implicitly) used in the definition of random reals (reals with a random binary
expansion, w.r.t the uniform measure).

We introduce, for computable metric spaces with a computable measure, a
notion of binary representation generalizing the base-two numeral system of


                                       2
the reals, and prove that:



• such a binary representation always exists,
• a point is random if and only if it has a unique binary expansion, which is
  random.



Moreover, our notion of binary representation allows to identify any com-
putable probability space with the Cantor space (in a computable-measure-
theoretic sense). It provides a tool to directly transfer elements of algorith-
mic randomness theory from the Cantor space to any computable probabil-
ity space. In particular, the characterization of randomness in terms of Kol-
mogorov complexity, even in a non-compact space, is a direct consequence of
this.



The way we handle computability on continuous spaces is largely inspired
by representation theory. However, the main goal of that theory is to study,
in general topological spaces, the way computability notions depend on the
chosen representation. Since we focus only on Computable Metric Spaces (see
[8] for instance) and Enumerative Lattices (introduced in setion 2.2) we shall
consider only one canonical representation for each set, so we do not use
representation theory in its general setting.



Our study of measures and randomness, although restricted to computable
metric spaces, involves computability notions on various sets which do not
have natural metric structures. Fortunately, all these sets become enumerative
lattices in a very natural way and the canonical representation provides in each
case the right computability notions.



In section 2, we develop a language intended to express computability con-
cepts, statements and proofs in a rigorous but still (we hope) transparent way.
The structure of computable metric space is then recalled. In section 3, we
introduce the notion of enumerative lattices and present two important ex-
amples to be used in the paper. Section 4 is devoted to the detailed study of
computability on the set of probability measures. In section 5 we define the
notion of binary representation on any computable metric space with a com-
putable measure and show how to construct such a representation. In section
6 we apply all this machinery to algorithmic randomness.


                                       3
2   Basic definitions


2.1 Recursive functions.


The starting point of recursion theory was the mathematization of the intu-
itive notion of function computable by an effective procedure or algorithm. The
different systems and computation models formalizing mechanical procedures
on natural numbers or symbols have turned out to coincide, and therefore have
given rise to a robust mathematical notion which grasps (this is Church-Turing
thesis) what means for a (partial) function ϕ : N → N to be algorithmic, and
which can be made precise using any one of the numerous formalisms pro-
posed. Following the usual denomination, we call such a function a (partial)
recursive function. To show that a function ϕ : N → N is recursive, we will
exhibit an algorithm A which on input n halts and outputs ϕ(n) when it is
defined, runs forever otherwise.

In the same vein, a robust notion of (partial) recursive function F : NN → NN
can be characterized by different formal definitions:

Via domain theory (see [9]). This approach takes the notion of recursive
 function as primitive, which avoids the definition of a new computation
 model. A partial function F : NN → NN is recursive if there is a recursive
 function F ′ : N∗ → N∗ which is monotone for the prefix ordering, such that
 for all σ ∈ dom(F ), F (σ) is the infinite sequence obtained at the limit by
 computing F ′ on the finite prefixes of σ (precisely, the Baire space can be
 embedded into the set of finite and infinite sequences of integers ordered by
 the prefix relation, which is an ω-algebraic domain).
Via oracle Turing machines (used by Ko and Friedman, see [10], [11]).
 An oracle Turing machine M[σ] is a Turing machine which works with a
 sequence σ ∈ NN provided as oracle and is allowed to read elements σn of
 the oracle sequence. On an input n ∈ N, it may stop and output a natural
 number, interpreted as F (σ)n .
Via type-two Turing machines (defined by Weihrauch, see [12]). Expressed
 differently, it is essentially the same computation model (it works on sym-
 bols instead of integers).

Again, to show that a function F : NN → NN is recursive, we will exhibit an
algorithm A which given σ ∈ NN as oracle and n as input, halts and outputs
F (σ)n . The algorithm together with σ in the oracle is denoted A[σ] .

A sequence σ ∈ NN is recursive if the function n 7→ σn is recursive. Given
a family (σi )i∈N of recursive sequences, σi is recursive uniformly in i if
the function hi, ni 7→ σi,n is recursive, where h, i denotes some computable
bijection between tuples and natural numbers.


                                      4
2.2 Representations and constructivity


A representation on a set X is a surjective (partial) function ρ : NN → X. Let
X and Y be sets with fixed representations ρX and ρY .

Definition 2.2.1 (Constructivity notions)

(1) An element x ∈ X is constructive if there is a recursive sequence σ
    such that ρX (σ) = x.
(2) The elements of a sequence (xi )i∈N are uniformly constructive if there
    is a family (σi )i of uniformly recursive sequences such that ρX (σi ) = xi
    for all i.
(3) A function f :⊆ X → Y is constructive on D ⊆ X if there exists a re-
    cursive function F : NN → NN such that the following diagram commutes
    on ρ−1
         X (D):

                     F
               NN −→ NN
              ρX ↓       ↓ ρY     (that is, f ◦ ρX = ρY ◦ F on ρ−1
                                                                X (D))
                     f
                X −→ Y

We say that y is x-constructive if there is a function f :⊆ X → Y con-
structive on {x} with f (x) = y. If x is constructive, x-constructivity and
constructivity are equivalent. Note that two sequences of natural numbers can
be merged into a single one, so the product X × Y of two represented sets
has a canonical representation. In particular, it makes sense to speak about
(x, y)-constructive elements.


2.3 Objects


There is a canonical way of defining a representation on a set X when 1) some
collection of elementary objects of X can be encoded into natural numbers
and 2) an element of X can be described by a sequence of these elementary
objects. Once encoded into natural numbers, the elementary objects inherit
their finite character and may be output by algorithms. Let us make it precise:

Definition 2.3.1 A numbered set O is a countable set together with a total
surjection νO : N → O called the numbering. We write on for ν(n).

A numbered set O and a (partial) surjection δ : ON → X induce canonically
a representation ρ = δ ◦ νO . At least in this paper, all representations will be
obtained in this way. A sequence of finite objects which is mapped by δ to x
is called a description of x.


                                       5
An algorithm may then be seen as outputting objects:

Given a numbered set O, we say that an algorithm (plain or with oracle)
enumerates a sequence of objects (oni )i∈N if on input i it outputs ni . Given
a representation (O, δ) on a set X, an algorithm enumerating a description of
x ∈ X is said to describe x.

An algorithm may also take objects as inputs, with a restriction:

Definition 2.3.2 An algorithm A is said to be extensional on an element
x ∈ X if for all σ such that ρX (σ) = x, A[σ] describes the same element y ∈ Y .

We then say that A x-describes y or that A[x] describes y.

The constructivity notions of definition 2.2.1 can then be expressed using this
language, which will be used throughout this paper.

(1) An element x ∈ X is constructive if there is an algorithm describing x,
(2) The elements of a sequence (xi )i∈N are uniformly constructive if there is
    an algorithm A such that A(hi, .i) describes xi ,
(3) A function f :⊆ X → Y is constructive on D ⊆ X if there exists an
    algorithm which x-describes f (x) for all x ∈ D.

A x-constructive element y may be x-described by an algorithm which is
extensional only on x, and thus induce a function which is defined only at x.


2.4 Computable Metric Spaces


Definition 2.4.1 A computable metric space is a triple X = (X, d, S),
where:

• (X, d) is a separable complete metric space (polish metric space),

• S = {si : i ∈ N} is a countable dense subset of X,

• The real numbers d(si , sj ) are all computable, uniformly in hi, ji.

The elements of S are called the ideal points. The numbering νS defined
by νS (i) := si makes S a numbered set. Without loss of generality, νS can
be supposed to be injective: as d(si , sj ) > 0 can be semi-decided, νS can be
effectively transformed into an injective numbering. Then a sequence of ideal
points can be uniquely identified with the sequence of their names.

The numbered sets S and Q>0 induce the numbered set of ideal balls B :=
{B(si , qj ) : si ∈ S, qj ∈ Q>0 }, the numbering being νB (hi, ji) := B(si , qj ).


                                       6
We write Bhi,ji for νB (hi, ji). The closed ball {x ∈ X : d(s, x) ≤ r} is de-
noted B(s, q) and may not coincide with the closure of the open ball B(s, q)
(typically, if the space has disconnection).

We now recall some important examples of computable metric spaces:

examples:
                                                                            ′
(1) (ΣN , d, S) where Σ is a finite alphabet, d(ω, ω ′) := 2− min{n∈N:ωn 6=ωn } and
    S := {w000 . . . : w ∈ Σ∗ } where Σ∗ is the set of finite words on Σ and 0
    is some fixed symbol from Σ,
(2) (Rn , dRn , Qn ) with the euclidean metric and the standard numbering of
    Qn ,
(3) The product (X × Y, d, SX × SY ) of two computable metric spaces has
    a canonical computable metric space structure, with d((x, y), (x′, y ′)) =
    max{dX (x, x′ ), dY (y, y ′)}.

For further examples, like functions spaces C[0, 1] and Lp for computable p ≥ 1
we refer to [Weihrauch]. A sequence (xn )n∈N of points is said to be a fast
Cauchy sequence, or simply a fast sequence if d(xn , xn+1 ) < 2−n for all n.

Definition 2.4.2 On a computable metric space (X, d, S), the canonical rep-
resentation is the Cauchy representation (S, δC ) defined by δC (−
                                                                 →
                                                                 s ) = x for all
              →
              −
fast sequence s of ideal points converging to x.

Again, each set X with a computable metric structure (X, d, S) will be implic-
itly represented using the Cauchy representation. Then canonical constructiv-
ity notions derive directly from definition 2.2.1. It is usual to call a construc-
tive element of X a computable point, and a constructive function between
computable metric space, a computable function. Remark that the com-
putable real numbers are the computable points of the computable metric
space (R, d, Q).

The choice of this representation is justified by the classical result: every com-
putable function between computable metric spaces is continuous (on its do-
main of computability).

Proposition 2.4.1 The distance d : X × X → R is a computable function.

Proposition 2.4.2 For a point x ∈ X, the following statements are equiva-
lent:

• x is a computable point,

• all d(x, si ) are upper semi-computable uniformly in i,

• dx := d(x, .) : X → R is a computable function.


                                        7
Several metrics and effectivisations of a single set are possible, and induce
in general different computability notions: two computable metric structures
(s, S) and (d′ , S ′ ) are said to be effectively equivalent if id : (X, d, S) →
(X, d′ , S ′ ) is a computable homeomorphism (with computable inverse). In this
case, all computability notions are preserved replacing one structure by the
other (see [8] for details).



3   Enumerative Lattices


3.1 Definition


We introduce a simple structure using basic order theory, on which a natural
representation can be defined. The underlying ideas are those from domain
theory, but the framework is lighter and (hence) less powerful. Actually, it is
sufficient for the main purpose: proposition 3.1.1. This will be applied in the
last section on randomness.

Definition 3.1.1 An enumerative lattice is a triple (X, ≤, P) where (X, ≤
) is a complete lattice and P ⊆ X is a numbered set such that every element
x of X is the supremum of some subset of P.

We then define P↓ (x) := {p ∈ P : p ≤ x} (note that x = sup P↓ (x)). Any
element of X can be described by a sequence −→p of elements of P. Note that
the least element ⊥ need not belong to P: it can be described by the empty
set, of which it is the supremum.

Definition 3.1.2 The canonical representation on an enumerative lattice (X, ≤
, P) is the induced by the partial surjection δ≤ (−
                                                  →
                                                  p ) = sup −
                                                            →
                                                            p (where the se-
        →
        −
quence p may be empty).

From here and beyond, each set X endowed with an enumerative structure
(X, ≤, P) will be implicitly represented using the canonical representation.
Hence, canonical constructivity notions derive directly from definition 2.2.1.
Let us focus on an example: the identity function from X to X is computed
by an algorithm outputting exactly what is provided by the oracle. Hence,
when the oracle is empty, which describes ⊥, the algorithm runs forever and
outputs nothing, which is a description of ⊥.

examples:

(1) (R, ≤, Q) with R = R ∪ {−∞, +∞}: the constructive elements are the
    so-called lower semi-computable real numbers,


                                       8
(2) (2N , ⊆, {finite sets}): the constructive elements are the r.e sets from clas-
    sical recursion theory,
(3) ({⊥, ⊤}, ≤, {⊤}) with ⊥ < ⊤.

We recall that a real number x is computable if both x and −x are lower
semi-computable.

Here is the main interest of enumerative lattices:

Proposition 3.1.1 Let (X, ≤, P) be an enumerative lattice. There is an enu-
meration (xi )i∈N of all the constructive elements of X such that xi is construc-
tive uniformly in i.

proof: there is an enumeration ϕ of the r.e subsets of N: for every r.e subset
E of N, there is some i such that E = Ei := {ϕ(hi, ni) : n ∈ N}. Moreover, we
can take ϕ such that whenever Ei 6= ∅ the function ϕ(hi, .i) : N → N is total
(this is a classical construction from recursion theory, see [13]). Then consider
the associated algorithm Aϕ = νP ◦ ϕ: for every constructive element x there
is some i such that Aϕ (hi, .i) : N → P enumerates x (∅ is an enumeration of
⊥).                                                                            

Remark 3.1.1 Observe that on every enumerative lattice the Scott topology
can be defined: a Scott open set O is an upper subset (x ∈ O, x ≤ y ⇒ y ∈ O)
such that for each sequence −     →p = (pni )i∈N such that sup −
                                                               →
                                                               p ∈ O, there is some
k such that sup{pn0 , . . . , pnk } ∈ O.

If Y and Z have enumerative lattice structures, a function f : Y → Z is
said to be Scott-continuous if it is monotonic and commutes with suprema of
increasing sequences (one can prove that f is Scott-continuous if and only if
it is continuous for the Scott topologies on Y and Z) and is easy to see that
a Scott-continuous function f : Y → Z such that all f (sup{pn1 , . . . , pnk }) are
constructive uniformly in hn1 , . . . , nk i, is in fact a constructive function.


3.2 Functions from a computable metric space to an enumerative lattice


Given a computable metric space (X, d, S) and an enumerative space (Y, ≤, P),
we define the numbered set F of step functions from X to Y :
                                       
                                        pj
                                       
                                              if x ∈ Bi
                           fhi,ji (x) = 
                                       ⊥     otherwise


We then define C(X, Y ) as the closure of F under pointwise suprema, with
the pointwise ordering ⊑. We have directly:


                                        9
Proposition 3.2.1 (C(X, Y ), ⊑, F ) is an enumerative lattice.
                       +
example: the set R = [0, +∞) ∪ {+∞} has an enumerative lattice structure
  +                                                       +
(R , ≤, Q+ ), which induces the enumerative lattice C(X, R ) of positive lower
                                        +
semi-continuous functions from X to R . Its constructive elements are the
positive lower semi-computable functions.


We now show that the constructive elements of C(X, Y ) are exactly the con-
structive functions from X to Y .

To each algorithm A we associate a constructive element of C(X, Y ), enumerat-
ing a sequence of step functions: enumerate all hn, i0 , . . . , ik i with d(sij , sij+1 ) <
2−(j+1) for all j < k (prefix of a super-fast sequence). Keep only those for which
the computation of A[i0 ,...,ik ,0,0,...] (n) halts without trying to read beyond ik .
For each one, the latter computation outputs some element pl : then output
the step function fhi,li where Bi = B(sik , 2−k ). We denote by fA the supremum
of the enumerated sequence of step functions.

Lemma 3.2.1 For all x on which A is extensional, fA (x) is the element of
Y described by A[x] .

proof: let y be the element described by A[x] .

For all hn, i0 , . . . , ik i for which some fhi,ji is enumerated with x ∈ Bi , there is a
fast sequence −   →                                                                −
                                                                                   →
                   s converging to x starting with si0 , . . . , sik , for which A[ s ] (n) =
pj . Then y ≥ pj = fhi,ji (x). Hence y ≥ fA (x).

There is a super-fast sequence −→                               −
                                                                →
                                s converging to x: for all n, A[ s ] (n) stops
and outputs some pjn , so there is some in with x ∈ Bin such that fhin ,jni is
enumerated. Hence, y = supn pjn = sup fhin ,jn i (x) ≤ fA (x).              

Proposition 3.2.2 The constructive elements of C(X, Y ) are exactly the (to-
tal) constructive functions from X to Y .

proof: the supremum of a r.e subset E of F is a total constructive function:
semi-decide in dovetail x ∈ Bi for all fhi,ji ∈ E, and enumerate pj each time a
test stops.

Given a total constructive function f , there is an algorithm A which on each
x ∈ X is extensional and describes f (x), so f = fA .                      

The proof even shows that the equivalence is constructive: the evaluation of
any f : X → Y on any x ∈ X can be achieved by an algorithm having access
to any description of f ∈ C(X, Y ), and any algorithm evaluating f can be
converted into an algorithm describing f ∈ C(X, Y ). More precisely:


                                            10
Proposition 3.2.3 Let X, X ′ be computable metric spaces and Y be an enu-
merative lattice:

Evaluation: The function Eval : C(X, Y ) × X → Y is constructive,

Curryfication: If a function f : X ′ ×X → Y is constructive then the function
from X ′ to C(X, Y ) mapping x′ ∈ X ′ to f (x′ , .) is constructive.

Lemma 3.2.1 and proposition 3.2.2 implie:

Corollary 3.2.1 The x-constructive elements of Y are exactly the images of
x by total constructive functions from X to Y .

This is a particular property of the enumerative lattice structure: a partial con-
structive function from some represented space to another cannot in general
be extended to a total constructive one.


3.3 The Open Subsets of a computable metric space


Following [14], [15], we define constructivity notions on the open subsets of
a computable metric space. The topology τ induced by the metric has the
numbered set B of ideal balls as a countable basis: any open set can then be
described as a countable union of ideal balls. Actually (τ, ⊆, B) is an enumer-
ative space (cf section 3), the supremum operator being union. The canonical
representation on enumerative lattices (definition 3.1.2) induces constructivity
notions on τ , a constructive open set being called a recursively enumerable
(r.e) open set.

On the integers, it may be unnatural to show that some subset is recursively
enumerable, and the equivalent notion of semi-decidable set is often used.
This notion can be extended to subsets of a computable metric space, and it
happens to be very useful in the applications. We recall from section 3 that
{⊥, ⊤} is an enumerative lattice, which induces canonically the enumerative
lattice C(X, {⊥, ⊤}).

Definition 3.3.1 A subset A of X is said to be semi-decidable if its indi-
cator function 1A : X → {⊥, ⊤} (mapping x ∈ A to ⊤ and x ∈ / A to ⊥) is
constructive.

In other words, A is semi-decidable if there is a recursive function ϕ such that
for all x ∈ X and all description −
                                  →          −
                                             →
                                  s of x, ϕ[ s ] stops if and only if x ∈ A. It is
a well-known result (see [15]) that the two notions are effectively equivalent:

Proposition 3.3.1 A subset of X is semi-decidable if and only if it is a r.e


                                       11
open set. Moreover, the enumerative lattices (τ, ⊆, B) and C(X, {⊥, ⊤}) are
constructively isomorphic.

The isomorphism is the function U 7→ 1U and its inverse f 7→ f −1 (⊤). In
other words, f −1 (⊤) is f -r.e uniformly in f and 1U is U-lower semi-computable
uniformly in U. It implies in particular that:

Corollary 3.3.1 The intersection (U, V ) 7→ U ∩V and union (U, V ) 7→ U ∪V
are constructive functions from τ × τ to τ .

For computable functions between computable metric spaces, we have the
following useful characterization:

Proposition 3.3.2 Let (X, dX , SX ) and (Y, dY , SY ) be computable metric spaces.
A function f : X → Y is computable on D ⊆ X if and only if the preim-
ages of ideal balls are uniformly r.e open (in D) sets. That is, for all i,
f −1 (Bi ) = Ui ∩ D where Ui is a r.e open set uniformly in i.

We will use the following notion:

Definition 3.3.2 A Π02 -set is a set of the form     n Un where (Un )n is a se-
                                                   T

quence of uniformly r.e open sets.



4   Computing with probability measures


4.1 Measures as points of the computable metric space M(X)


Here, following [5], we define computable measures in the following way: first
the space M(X) is endowed with a computable metric space structure com-
patible with the weak topology and then computable measures are defined as
the constructive points.

Given a metric space (X, d), the set M(X) of Borel probability measures over
X can be endowed with the weak topology, which is the finest topology for
which µn → µ if and only if f dµn → f dµ for all continuous bounded
                                R        R

function f : X → R. This topology is metrizable and when X is separable
and complete, M(X) is also separable and complete (see [16]). Moreover, a
computable metric structure on X induces in a canonical way a computable
metric structure on M(X).

Let D ⊂ M(X) be the set of those probability measures that are concen-
trated in finitely many points of S and assign rational values to them. It
can be shown that this is a dense subset ([16]). The numberings νS of ideal


                                      12
points of X and νQ of the rationals numbers induce a numbering νD of ideal
measures: µhhn1 ,...,nk i,hm1 ,...,mk ii is the measure concentrated over the finite set
{sn1 , . . . , snk } where qmi is the weight of sni .


4.1.1 The Prokhorov metric

Let us consider the particular metric on M(X):

Definition 4.1.1 The Prokhorov metric ρ on M(X) is defined by:

       ρ(µ, ν) := inf{ǫ ∈ R+ : µ(A) ≤ ν(Aǫ ) + ǫ for every Borel set A}.             (1)

where Aǫ = {x : d(x, A) < ǫ}.

It is known that it is indeed a metric, which induces the weak topology on
M(X) (see [16]). Moreover, we have that:

Proposition 4.1.1 (M(X), D, ρ) is a computable metric space.

proof: We have to show that the real numbers ρ(µi , µj ) are all computable,
uniformly in hi, ji. First observe that if U is a r.e open subset of X, µi (U) is
lower semi-computable uniformly in i and U. Indeed, if (sn1 , qm1 ), . . . , (snk , qmk )
are the mass points of µi together with their weights (recoverable from i)
then µi (U) = snj ∈U qmj . As the snj which belong to U can be enumerated
                  P

from any description of U, this sum is lower-semi-computable. In particular,
µi (Bi1 ∪ . . . ∪ Bik ) is lower semi-computable and µi (B i1 ∪ . . . ∪ B ik ) is upper
semi-computable, both of them uniformly in hi, i1 , . . . , ik i

Now we prove that ρ(µi , µj ) is computable uniformly in hi, ji.

Observe that if µi is an ideal measure concentrated over Si , then (1) becomes
ρ(µi , µj ) = inf{ǫ ∈ Q : ∀A ⊂ Si , µi (A) < µj (Aǫ ) + ǫ}. Since µj is also an ideal
measure and Aǫ is a finite union of open ideal balls, the number µj (Aǫ ) is lower
semi-computable (uniformly) and then ρ(µi , µj ) is upper semi-computable,
uniformly in hi, ji. To see that ρ(µi , µj ) is lower-semicomputable, uniformly
in hi, ji, observe that ρ(µi , µj ) = sup{ǫ ∈ Q : ∃A ⊂ Si , µi (A) > µj (Aǫ ) + ǫ},
where Aǫ = {x : d(x, A) ≤ ǫ} (a finite union of closed ideal balls when A ⊂ Si )
and use the upper semi-computability of µj (Aǫ ).                                  

Definition 4.1.2 A measure µ is computable if it is a constructive point
of (M(X), D, ρ).

The effectivization of the space of Borel probability measures M(X) is of
theoretical interest, and opens the question: what kind of information can be
(algorithmically) recovered from a description of a measure as a point of the
computable metric space M(X) ? The two most current uses of a measure are


                                          13
to give weights to measurable sets and means to measurable functions. Can
these quantities be computed ?


4.1.2 The Wasserstein metric

In the particular case when the metric space X is bounded, an alternative
metric can be defined on M(X). When f is a real-valued function, µf denotes
  f dµ.
R


Definition 4.1.3 The Wasserstein metric on M(X) is defined by:

                        W (µ, ν) =       sup       (|µf − νf |)               (2)
                                     f ∈1−Lip(X)


where 1 − Lip(X) is the space of 1-Lipschitz functions from X to R.

We recall (see [17]) that W has the following properties:

Proposition 4.1.2

(1) W is a distance and if X is separable and complete then M(X) with this
    distance is a separable and complete metric space.
(2) The topology induced by W is the weak topology and thus W is equivalent
    to the Prokhorov metric.

Moreover, if (X, S, d) is a computable metric space (and X bounded), then:

Proposition 4.1.3 (M(X), D, W ) is a computable metric space.

proof: We have to show that the distance W (µi , µj ) between ideal measures
is uniformly computable. From hi, ji we can compute the set Si,j = supp(µi ) ∪
supp(µj ). Let s0 ∈ Si,j , then we can suppose that the supremum in (2) is
taken over 1 − Lip0s0 (X) := {f ∈ 1 − Lip(X) : 1 − Lip0s0 (X)f (s) = 0}. Given
some precision ǫ we construct a finite set Nǫ ⊂ 1−Lip0s0 (X) made of uniformly
computable functions such that for each f ∈ 1 −Lip0s0 (X) there is some l ∈ Nǫ
satisfying sup{|f (x) − l(x)| : x ∈ Si,j } < ǫ: compute an integer m such that
Si,j ⊂ B(s, m); then |f | < m for every f ∈ 1 − Lip0s (X). Let n be such that
m/n < 2ǫ. For each s ∈ Si,j and a ∈ { lm      }m
                                            n l=−m
                                                    let us consider the functions
               +                            −
defined by φs,l (x) := a + d(s, x) and φs,l (x) := a − d(s, x). Then it is not
difficult to see that Nǫ defined as the set of all possible combinations of max
and min made with the φ+−  s,l (x) satisfy the required condition.


Therefore, since sup(|f − g|) < ǫ implies |µ(f − g)| < ǫ we have that:

            W (µi , µj ) ∈ [ sup (|µi g − µj g|), sup (|µi g − µj g|) + 2ǫ]
                           g∈Nǫ                 g∈Nǫ



                                         14
where the µi g are computable, uniformly in i. The result follows.                

When X is bounded, the effectivisation using the Prokhorov or the Wasserstein
metrics turn out to be equivalent.

Theorem 4.1.1 The Prokhorov and the Wasserstein metrics are computably
equivalent. That is, the identity function id : (M(X), D, ρ) → (M(X), D, W )
is a computable isomorphism, as well as its inverse.

proof: Let M be an integer such that supx,y∈X d(x, y) < M. Suppose ρ(µ, ν) <
ǫ/(M + 1). Then, by the coupling theorem [16], for every f ∈ 1 − Lip(X) it
holds |µf − νf | ≤ ǫ, then W (µ, ν) < ǫ. Conversely, suppose W (µ, ν) < ǫ2 < 1.
Let A be a Borel set and define gǫA := |1−d(x, A)/ǫ|+. Then ǫgǫA ∈ 1−Lip(X).
W (µ, ν) < ǫ2 implies µǫgǫA < νǫgǫA +ǫ2 and since µ(A) ≤ µgǫA and νgǫA ≤ ν(Aǫ ),
we conclude µ(A) ≤ ν(Aǫ ) + ǫ and then ρ(µ, ν) < ǫ. Therefore, given a fast
sequence of ideal measures converging to µ in the Prokhorov metric, we can
construct a fast sequence of ideal measures converging to µ in the W metric
and vice-versa.                                                              

This equivalence offers an alternative method to prove computability of mea-
sures. It is used for example in [18] to show the computability of the physical
measures for some classes of dynamical systems.


4.2 Measures as valuations


We now investigate the first problem: can the measure of sets be computed
from the Cauchy description of a measure? Actually, the answer is positive
for a very small part of the Borel sigma-field. It is a well-known fact that a
Borel (probability) measure µ is characterized by the measure of open sets,
which generate the Borel sigma-field. That is, by the valuation vµ : τ → [0, 1]
which maps an open set to its µ-measure. The question is then so study this
characterization from a computability viewpoint.

The first result is that the measure of open sets can be lower semi-computed,
using the Cauchy description of the measure.

Proposition 4.2.1 The valuation operator v : M(X) × τ → [0, 1] mapping
(µ, U) to µ(U) is lower semi-computable.

proof: as vµ = v(µ, .) is Scott-continuous (see remark 3.1.1), it suffices to
show that it is uniformly lower semi-computable on finite unions of balls.

We first restrict to ideal measures µi : we have already seen (proof of proposi-
tion 4.1.1) that all µi (Bi1 ∪ . . . ∪ Bik ) are lower semi-computable real numbers,


                                        15
uniformly in hi, i1 , . . . , ik i.

Now let (µkn )n∈N a description of a measure µ, that is a fast sequence converg-
ing to µ for the Prokhorov distance: then ρ(µkn , µ) ≤ ǫn where ǫn = 2−n+1 .
For n ≥ 1, and U = B(si1 , qj1 ) ∪ . . . ∪ B(sik , qjk ) define:
                                         [
                                  Un =         B(sim , qjm − ǫn )
                                         m≤k

           ǫn
note that Un−1 ⊆ Un and Unǫn ⊆ U. We show that µ(U) = supn (µjn (Un ) − ǫn ):

• µjn (Un ) ≤ µ(U) + ǫn for all n, so µ(U) ≥ supn (µjn (Un ) − ǫn ).

• µ(Un−1 ) ≤ µjn (Un ) + ǫn for all n. As Un−1 increases towards U as n → ∞,
µ(U) = supn (µ(Un−1 ) − 2ǫn ) ≤ supn (µjn (Un ) − ǫn ).

As the quantity µjn (Un ) − ǫn is lower semi-computable uniformly in n, we are
done (observe that everything is uniform in the finite description of U).   

The second result is stronger: the lower semi-computability of the measure of
the r.e open sets even characterizes the computability of the measure.

Theorem 4.2.1 Given a measure µ ∈ M(X), the following are equivalent:

(1) µ is computable,
(2) vµ : τ → [0, 1] is lower-semi-computable,
(3) µ(Bi1 ∪ . . . ∪ Bik ) is lower-semi-computable uniformly in hi1 , . . . , ik i.

proof:

[1 ⇒ 2] Direct from proposition 4.2.1. [2 ⇒ 3] Trivial. [3 ⇒ 1] We show that
ρ(µn , µ) is upper semi-computable uniformly in n, and then use proposition
2.4.2. Since ρ(µn , µ) < ǫ iff µn (A) < µ(Aǫ ) + ǫ for all A ⊂ Sn where Sn is the
finite support of µn , and µ(Aǫ ) is lower semi-computable (Aǫ is a finite union
of open ideal balls) ρ(µn , µ) < ǫ is semi-decidable, uniformly in n and ǫ. This
allows to construct a fast sequence of ideal measures converging to µ.         

It means that a representation which would be “tailor-made” to make the val-
uation constructive, describing a measure µ by the set of integers hi1 , . . . , ik , ji
satisfying µ(Bi1 ∪ . . . ∪ Bik ) > qj , would be constructively equivalent to the
Cauchy representation. This is the approach taken in [3] for the special case
X = [0, 1] and in [4] on an arbitrary sequential topological space. In both case,
the topology on M(X) induced by this representation is proved to be equiva-
lent to the weak topology. A domain theoretical approach was also developed
in [2] on a compact space, the Scott topology being proved to induce the weak
topology.


                                                16
4.2.1 The examples of the Cantor space and the unit interval.

On the Cantor space ΣN (where Σ is a finite alphabet) with its natural com-
putable metric space structure, the ideal balls are the cylinders. As a finite
union of cylinders can always be expressed as a disjoint (and finite) union of
cylinders, and the complement of a cylinder is a finite union of cylinders, we
have:

Corollary 4.2.1 A measure µ ∈ M(ΣN ) is computable iff the measures of
the cylinders are uniformly computable.

On the unit real interval, ideals balls are open rational intervals. Again, a
finite union of such intervals can always be expressed as a disjoint (and finite)
union of open rational intervals. Then:

Corollary 4.2.2 A measure µ ∈ M([0, 1]) is computable iff the measures of
the rational open intervals are uniformly lower-semi-computable.

If µ has no atoms, a rational open interval is the complement of at most
two disjoint open rational intervals, up to a null set. In this case, µ is then
computable iff the measures of the rational intervals are uniformly computable.


4.3 Measures as integrals


We now answer the second question: is the integral of functions computable
from the description of a measure ?

The computable metric space structure of X and the enumerative lattice struc-
          +                                                             +
ture of R induce in a canonical way the enumerative space C(X, R ) (see
section 3.2), which is actually the set of lower semi-continuous functions from
        +
X to R . We have:
                                                                                             +   +
Proposition 4.3.1 The integral operator                        : M(X) × C(X, R ) → R                 is
                                                           R

lower semi-computable.

proof: the integral of a finite supremum of step functions can be expressed
by induction on the number of functions: first, fhi,ji dµ = qj µ(Bi ) and
                                               R


    Z
        sup{fhi1 ,j1i , . . . , fhik ,jk i }dµ = qjm µ(Bi1 ∪ . . . ∪ Bik ) +
                                             Z
                                                 sup{fhi1 ,j1′ i , . . . , fhik ,jk′ i }dµ

where qjm is minimal among {qj1 , . . . , qjk } and qj1′ = qj1 − qjm , qj2′ = qj2 −
qjm , etc. Note that fhim ,jm
                            ′ i being the zero function can be removed.




                                                 17
Now, m can be computed and by proposition 4.2.1 the measure of finite unions
of ideal balls can be uniformly µ-lower semi-computed, so the integral above
can be uniformlyR µ-lower semi-computed. For any fixed measure µ, the in-
                               +        +
tegral operator dµ : C(X, R ) → R is Scott-continuous, so it is lower
semi-computable.                                                          

Again, the lower semi-computability of the integral of lower semi-computable
functions characterizes the computability of the measure:

Corollary 4.3.1 Given a measure µ ∈ M(X), the following are equivalent:

(1) µ is computable,
                    +        +
(2) R dµ : C(X, R ) → R is lower semi-computable,
    R

(3) sup{fi1 , . . . , fik }dµ is lower-semi-computable uniformly in hi1 , . . . , ik i.

proof:

[2 ⇔ 3] holds by Scott-continuity of the operator,

[1 ⇒ 2] is a direct consequence of proposition 4.3.1,

[2 ⇒ 1] is a direct consequence of theorem 4.2.1, composing the integral opera-
                                        +
tor with the function from τ to C(X, R ) mapping an open set to its indicator
function (which is computable, see proposition 3.3.1).                       

It means that a representation of measures which would be “tailor-made” to
make the integration constructive,          describing a measure by the set of integers
hi1 , . . . , ik , ji satisfying sup{fi1 , . . . , fik }dµ > qj , would be constructively
                                R

equivalent to the Cauchy representation.

A corollary of proposition 4.3.1 will be used in the last section: let (fi )i be
a sequence of uniformly computable functions, i.e. such that the function
(i, x) 7→ fi (x) is computable. If moreover fi R has a bound Mi computable
uniformly in i, then the function (µ, i) → fi dµ is computable. Indeed,
fi +  Mi (resp.  Mi − fi ) is uniformly lower (resp. upper) semi-computable,
so fi dµ = (fi + Mi )dµ − Mi = Mi − (Mi − fi )dµ and proposition 4.3.1
    R         R                           R

allow to conclude.



5   Computable Probability Spaces


The representation induced by the binary numeral system of real numbers is
generally presented as not adequate for computability purposes since simple
functions as x 7→ 3x are not computable with respect to it. This lies in the
fact that the real interval and the space of sequences are not homeomorphic.


                                          18
On the other hand, if we are insterested in probabilistic issues, the binary
representation is actually suitable, and may even be preferred: almost every
real has a unique binary expansion.

More generally, computability notions from computable analysis are effec-
tive versions of topological ones (semi-decidable sets are open, computable
functions are continuous, etc). What about effective versions of measure-
theoretical/probabilistic notions?

In this section we study a computable version of probability spaces, that is,
metric spaces equipped with a fixed computable Borel probability measure.
This will give us a framework allowing to talk about almost everywhere com-
putability or decidability notions. Let us then introduce:

Definition 5.0.1 A computable probability space is a pair (X , µ) where
X is a computable metric space and µ a computable Borel probability measure
on X.

Definition 5.0.2 A morphism of computable probability spaces F :
(X , µ) → (Y, ν), is a computable measure-preserving function F : DF ⊆ X →
Y where DF is a (full-measure) Π02 -set.

An isomorphism (F, G) : (X , µ) ⇄ (Y, ν) is a pair (F, G) of morphisms
such that G ◦ F = id on F −1 (DG ) and F ◦ G = id on G−1 (DF ).

We recall that F is measure-preserving if ν(A) = µ(F −1(A)) for all Borel set
A.



5.1 Generalized binary representations


The Cantor space 2ω (2 denotes {0, 1}) is a privileged place for computability.
This can be understood by the fact that it is the countable product (with the
product topology) of a finite space (with the discrete topology). A consequence
of this is that membership of a basic open set (cylinder) boils down to a
pattern-matching and is then decidable. As decidable sets must be clopen, this
property cannot hold in connected spaces. As a result, a computable metric
space is not in general constructively homeomorphic to the Cantor space.

Nevertheless, the real unit interval [0, 1] is not so far away from the Cantor
space. The binary numeral system provides a correspondence between real
numbers and binary sequences, which is certainly not homeomorphic, unless
we remove the small set of dyadic numbers. In particular, the remaining set
is totally disconnected, and the dyadic intervals form a basis of clopen sets.


                                     19
Actually, this correspondence makes the computable probability space [0, 1]
with the Lebesgue measure isomorphic to the Cantor space with the uniform
measure. This fact has been implicitly used, for instance, to extend algorithmic
randomness from the Cantor space with the uniform measure to the unit
interval with the Lebesgue measure.

We generalize this to any computable probability space, over which we define
the notion of binary representation. We show that every computable probabil-
ity space has a binary representation. This implies, in particular, that every
computable probability space is isomorphic to the Cantor space with a com-
putable measure. To carry out this generalization, let us briefly scrutinize the
binary numeral system on the unit interval:

δ : 2ω → [0, 1] is a total surjective morphism. Every non-dyadic real has a
unique expansion, and the inverse of δ, defined on the set D of non-dyadic num-
bers, is computable. Moreover, D is large both in a topological and measure-
theoretical sense: it is a residual (a countable intersection of dense open sets)
and has measure one. (δ, δ −1 ) is then an isomorphism.

In our generalization, we do not require every binary sequence to be the ex-
pansion of a point, which would force X to be compact.

Definition 5.1.1 A binary representation of a computable probability space
(X , µ) is a pair (δ, µδ ) where µδ is a computable probability measure on 2ω and
δ : (2ω , µδ ) → (X , µ) is a surjective morphism such that, calling δ −1 (x) the set
of expansions of x ∈ X:

• there is a dense full-measure Π02 -set D of points having a unique expansion,

• δ −1 : D → δ −1 (D) is computable.

Remark that when the support of the measure (the smallest closed set of full
measure) is the whole space X, like the Lebesgue measure on the interval,
a full-measure Π02 -set is always a residual, but in general it is only dense on
the support of the measure: that is the reason why we explicitly require D to
be dense. Also remark that a binary representation δ always induces an iso-
morphism (δ, δ −1 ) between the Cantor space and the computable probability
space.

The sequel of this section is devoted to the proof of the following result:

Theorem 5.1.1 Every computable probability space (X , µ) has a binary rep-
resentation.

The space, restricted to the domain D of the isomorphism, is then totally
disconnected: the preimages of the cylinders form a basis of clopen and even


                                        20
decidable sets. In the whole space, they are not decidable any more. Instead,
they are almost decidable.

Definition 5.1.2 A set A is said to be almost decidable if there are two
r.e open sets U and V such that:

          U ⊂ A,     V ⊆ AC ,     U ∪ V is dense and has measure one

Definition 5.1.3 A measurable set A is said to be µ-continuous or a µ-
continuity set if µ(∂A) = 0 where ∂A = A ∩ X \ A is the boundary of A.

Remark that, as for subsets of N, a set is almost decidable if and only if its
complement is a.s. decidable. An almost decidable set is always a continuity
set. Let B(s, r) be a µ-continuous ball with computable radius: in general it is
not an almost decidable set (for instance, isolated points may be at distance
exactly r from s). But if there is no ideal point is at distance r from s, then
B(s, r) is almost decidable: take U = B(s, r) and V = X \ B(s, r).

We say that the elements of a sequence (Ai )i∈N are uniformly a.s. decidable if
there are two sequences (Ui )i∈N and (Vi )i∈N of uniformly r.e sets satisfying the
conditions above.

Lemma 5.1.1 There is a sequence (rn )n∈N of uniformly computable reals such
that (B(si , rn ))hi,ni is a basis of uniformly almost decidable balls.

proof: define Uhi,ki = {r ∈ R+ : µ(B(si , r)) < µ(B(si , r)) + 1/k}: by com-
putability of µ, this is a r.e open subset of R+ , uniformly in hi, ki. It is further-
more dense in R+ : the spheres Sr = B(si , r) \ B(si , r) form a partition of the
space when r varies in R+ and µ is finite, so the set of r for which µ(Sr ) ≥ 1/k
is finite.

Define Vhi,ji = R+ \ {d(si , sj )}: this is a dense r.e open set, uniformly in hi, ji.

Then by the computable Baire Category Theorem (see [19], [20]), the dense Π02 -
set hi,ki Uhi,ki ∩ hi,ji Vhi,ji contains a sequence (rn )n∈N of uniformly computable
   T              T

real numbers which is dense in R+ . In other words, all rn are computable,
uniformly in n. By construction, for any si and rn , B(si , rn ) is almost decidable.

We recall that from an enumeration (In )n∈N of all the rational compact inter-
vals of R+ , rn is constructed computing a nested shrinking sequence (Jkn )k∈N
of rational compact intervals starting from J0n = In , and such that Jk+1
                                                                        n
                                                                            ⊆
 n                           T n
Jk ∩ Uk ∩ Vk . Then {rn } = k Jk .                                          

We will denote B(si , rn ) by Bkµ where k = hi, ni. Note that different algorith-
mic descriptions of the same µ may yield different sequences (rn )n∈N , so Bkµ
is an abusive notation. It is understood that some algorithmic description of
µ has been chosen and fixed. This can be done only because the measure µ


                                         21
is computable, which is then a crucial hypothesis. We denote X \ B(si , rn ) by
Ckµ and define:

Definition 5.1.4 For w ∈ 2∗ , the cell Γ(w) is defined by induction on |w|:


        Γ(ǫ) = X,    Γ(w0) = Γ(w) ∩ Ciµ           and         Γ(w1) = Γ(w) ∩ Biµ
where ǫ is the empty word and i = |w|.

This an almost decidable set, uniformly in w.


proof: (of theorem 5.1.1). We construct an encoding function b : D → 2ω , a
decoding function δ : Dδ → X, and show that δ is a binary representation,
with b = δ −1 .

Encoding.

Let D = i Biµ ∪Ciµ : this is a dense full-measure Π02 -set. Define the computable
         T

function b : D → 2ω by:
                                      
                                      1
                                      
                                               if x ∈ Biµ
                            b(x)i =
                                      0       if x ∈ Ciµ
                                      



Let x ∈ D: ω = b(x) is also characterized by {x} = i Γ(ω0..i−1). Let µδ be
                                                                   T

the image measure of µ by b: µδ = µ ◦ b−1 . b is then a morphism from (X, µ)
to (2ω , µδ ).

Decoding.

Let Dδ be the set of binary sequences ω such that                i Γ(ω0..i−1 ) is a singleton.
                                                               T

We define the decoding function δ : Dδ → X by:
                                      \
                        δ(ω) = x if       Γ(ω0..i−1 ) = {x}
                                      i



ω is called an expansion of x. Remark that x ∈ Biµ ⇒ ωi = 1 and x ∈ Ciµ ⇒
ωi = 0, which implies in particular that if x ∈ D, x has a unique expansion,
which is b(x). Hence, b = δ −1 : δ −1 (D) → D and µδ (Dδ ) = µ(D) = 1.

We now show that δ : Dδ → X is a surjective morphism. For seek of clarity,
the center and the radius of the ball Biµ will be denoted si and ri respectively.
Let us call i an n-witness for ω if ri < 2−(n+1) , ωi = 1 and Γ(ω0..i ) 6= ∅.

• Dδ is a Π02 -set: we show that Dδ =         n {ω ∈ 2
                                                         ω
                                                             : ω has a n-witness}.
                                          T



                                          22
Let ω ∈ Dδ and x = δ(ω). For each n, x ∈ B(si , ri ) for some i with ri < 2−(n+1) .
Since x ∈ Γ(ω0..i ), we have that Γ(ω0..i ) 6= ∅ and ωi = 1 (otherwise Γ(ω0..i ) is
disjoint of Biµ ). In other words, i is an n-witness for ω.

Conversely, if ω has a n-witness in for all n, since Γ(ω0..in ) ⊆ Biµn whose
radius tends to zero, the nested sequence (Γ(ω0..in ))n of closed cells has, by
completeness of the space, a non-empty intersection, which is a singleton.

• δ : Dδ → X is computable. For each n, find some n-witness in of ω: the
sequence (sin )n is a fast sequence converging to δ(ω).

• δ is surjective: we show that each point x ∈ X has at least one expansion.
To do this, we construct by induction a sequence ω = ω0 ω1 . . . such that
for all i, x ∈ Γ(ω0 . . . ωi ). Let i ≥ 0 and suppose that ω0 . . . ωi−1 (empty
when i = 0) has been constructed. As Biµ ∪ Ciµ is open dense and Γ(ω0..i−1) is
open, Γ(ω0..i−1) = Γ(ω0..i−1 ) ∩ (Biµ ∪ Ciµ ) which equals Γ(ω0..i−10)∪Γ(ω0..i−1 1).
Hence, one choice for ωi ∈ {0, 1} gives x ∈ Γ(ω0..i ).

By construction, x ∈ i Γ(ω0..i−1). As (Biµ )i is a basis and ωi = 1 whenever
                        T

x ∈ Biµ , ω is an expansion of x.                                         



5.2 Another characterization of the computability of measures


The existence of a basis of almost decidable sets also leads to another char-
acterization of the computability of measures, which is reminiscent of what
happens on the Cantor space (see corollary 4.2.1). Let us say that two bases
(Ui )i and (Vi )i of the topology τ are constructively equivalent if both idτ :
(τ, ⊆, U) → (τ, ⊆, V) and its inverse are constructive functions between enu-
merative lattices.

Corollary 5.2.1 A measure µ ∈ M(X) is computable if and only if there
is a basis U = (Ui )i∈N of uniformly almost decidable open sets which is con-
structively equivalent to B and such that all µ(Ui1 ∪ . . . ∪ Uik ) are computable
uniformly in hi1 , . . . , ik i.

proof: if µ is computable, the a.s. decidable balls Uhi,ni = B(si , rn ) are basis
which is constructively equivalent to B: indeed, B(si , rn ) = qj <rn B(si , qj )
                                                                  S

and B(si , qj ) = rn <qj B(si , rn ), and rn is computable uniformly in n.
                 S


For the converse, the valuation function fµ is lower semi-computable. Indeed,
the r.e open sets are uniformly r.e relatively to the basis U, so their mea-
sures can be lower-semi-computed, computing the measures of finite unions of
elements of U. Hence µ is computable by theorem 4.2.1.                     


                                        23
6   Algorithmic randomness


On the Cantor space with a computable measure µ, Martin-Löf originally
defined the notion of an individual random sequence as a sequence passing
all µ-randomness tests. A µ-randomness test à la Martin-Löf is a sequence of
uniformly r.e open sets (Un )n satisfying µ(Un ) ≤ 2−n . The set n Un has null
                                                                  T

measure, in an effective way: it is then called an effective null set.

Equivalently, a µ-randomness test can be defined as a positive lower semi-
computable function t : 2ω → R satisfying tdµ ≤ 1 (see [21] for instance).
                                               R

The associated effective null set is {x : t(x) = +∞} = n {x : t(x) > 2n }.
                                                             T

Actually, every effective null set can be put in this form for some t. A point
is then called µ-random if it lies in no effective null set.

Following Gács, we will use the second presentation of randomness tests which
is more suitable to express uniformity.


6.1 Randomness w.r.t any probability measure


Definition 6.1.1 Given a measure µ ∈ M(X), a µ-randomness test is
                                    +
a µ-constructive element t of C(X, R ), such that tdµ ≤ 1. Any subset of
                                                 R

{x ∈ X : t(x) = +∞} is called a µ-effective null set.

A uniform randomness test is a constructive function T from M(X) to
      +
C(X, R ) such that for all µ ∈ M(x), T µ dµ ≤ 1 where T µ denotes T (µ).
                                    R


Note that T can be also seen as a lower-semi-computable function from M(X)×
       +
X to R (see section 3.2).

A presentation à la Martin-Löf can be directly obtained using the constructive
                      +                                +
functions F : C(X, R ) → τ N and G : τ N → C(X, R ) defined by: F (t)n :=
t−1 (2n , +∞) and G((Un )n )(x) := sup{n : x ∈ i≤n Ui }. They satisfy F ◦ G =
                                                T

id : τ N → τ N and preserve the corresponding effective null sets.

A uniform randomness test T induces a µ-randomness test T µ for all µ. We
show two important results which hold on any computable metric space:

• the two notions are actually equivalent (theorem 6.1.1),

• there is a universal uniform randomness test (theorem 6.1.2).

The second result was already obtained by Gács, but only on spaces which
have recognizable Boolean inclusions, which is an additional computability


                                      24
property on the basis of ideal balls.
                                                                      +
By proposition 3.2.2, constructive functions from M(X) to C(X, R ) can be
                                                                             +
identified to constructive elements of the enumerative lattice C(M(X), C(X, R )).
Let (Hi )i∈N be an enumeration of all its constructive elements (proposition
3.1.1): Hi = supk fϕ(i,k) where ϕ : N2 → N is some recursive function and the
fn are step functions.
                                                                              +
Lemma 6.1.1 There is a constructive function T : N × M(X) → C(X, R )
satisfying:

• for all i, Ti = T (i, .) is a uniform randomness test,

• if       Hi (µ)dµ < 1 for some µ, then Ti (µ) = Hi (µ).
       R


proof:   To enumerate only tests, we would like to be able to semi-decide
  supk<n fϕ(i,k) (µ)dµ < 1. But supk<n fϕ(i,k) (µ) is only lower semi-computable
R

(from µ). To overcome this problem, we use another class of basic function.

Let Y be a computable metric space: for an ideal point s of Y and positive
rationals q, r, ǫ, define the hat function:

                         hq,s,r,ǫ(y) := q.[1 − [d(y, s) − r]+ /ǫ]+

where [a]+ = max{0, a}. This is a continuous function whose value is q in
B(s, r), 0 outside B(s, r+ǫ). The numberings of S and Q>0 induce a numbering
(hn )n∈N of all the hat functions. They can be taken as an alternative to step
                                                +
functions in the enumerative lattice C(Y, R ): they yield the same computable
structure. Indeed, step functions can be constructively expressed as suprema
of such functions: fhi,ji = sup{hqj ,s,r−ǫ,ǫ : 0 < ǫ < r} where Bi = B(s, r), and
conversely.

We apply this to Y = M(X)×X endowed with the canonical computable met-
                                                                          +
ric structure. By Curryfication it provides functions hn ∈ C(M(X), C(X, R ))
with which the Hi can be expressed: there is a recursive function ψ : N2 → N
such that for all i, Hi = supk hψ(i,k) .

Furthermore, hn (µ) (strictly speaking, Eval(hn , µ), see proposition 3.2.3) is
bounded by a constant         computable from n and independent of µ. Hence, the
integration operator : M(X) × N → [0, 1] which maps (µ, hi1 , . . . , ik i) to
                            R

  sup{hi1 (µ), . . . , hik (µ)}dµ is computable.
R


We are now able to define    T : T (i, µ) = sup{Hik (µ) : Hik (µ)dµ < 1} where
                                                               R

Hik = supn<k hψ(i,n) . As Hik (µ)dµ can be computed from i, k and a description
                         R
                                                                +
of µ, T is a constructive function from N × M(X) to C(X, R ).                 


                                           25
As a consequence, every randomness test for a particular measure can be
extended to a uniform test:

Theorem 6.1.1 (Uniformity vs non-uniformity) Let µ0 be a measure. For
every µ0 -randomness test t there is a uniform randomness test T : M(X) →
       +
C(X, R ) with T (µ0 ) = 12 t.

proof: let µ0 be a measure and t a µ0 -randomness test: 12 t is then a µ0 -
                                                         +
constructive element of the enumerative lattice C(X, R ), so by lemma 3.2.1
                                                        +
there is a constructive element H of C(M(X), C(X, R )) such that H(µ0) =
1
2
  t. There is some i such that H = Hi : Ti isR a uniform randomness test satis-
                 1
fying Ti (µ0 ) = 2 t because Hi (µ0 )dµ0 = 21 tdµ0 < 1.
                            R
                                                                             

Theorem 6.1.2 (Universal uniform test) There is a universal uniform ran-
domness test, that is a uniform test Tu such that for every uniform test T there
is a constant cT with Tu ≥ cT T .

proof: it is defined by Tu := i 2−i−1 Ti : as every Ti is a uniform randomness
                              P

test, Tu is also a uniform randomness test, and if T is a uniform impossibility
                                                                          +
test, then in particular 21 T isR a constructiveRelement of C(M(X), C(X, R )),
so 21 T = Hi for some i. As Hi (µ)dµ = 21 T (µ)dµ < 1 for all µ, Ti (µ) =
Hi (µ) = 21 T (µ) for all µ, that is Ti = 21 T . So Tu ≥ 2−i−2 T .           

Definition 6.1.2 Given a measure µ, a point x ∈ X is called µ-random if
Tuµ (x) < ∞. Equivalently, x is µ-random if it lies in no µ-effective null set.

The set of µ-random points is denoted by Rµ . This is the complement of the
maximal µ-effective null set {x ∈ X : Tuµ (x) = +∞}.



6.2 Randomness on a computable probability space


We study the particular case of a computable measure. As a morphism of
computable probability spaces is compatible with measures and computability
structures, it shall be compatible with algorithmic randomness. Indeed:

Proposition 6.2.1 Morphisms of computable probability spaces are defined
on random points and preserve randomness.

To prove it, we shall use the following lemma:

Lemma 6.2.1 In a computable probability space (X , µ), every random point
lies in every r.e open set of full measure.


                                     26
proof: let U = hi,ji∈E B(si , qj ) be a r.e open set of measure one, with E a
                    S

r.e subset of N. Let F be the r.e set {hi, ki : ∃j, hi, ji ∈ E, qk < qj }. Define:

                                                      VnC =
                        [                                          [
         Un =                     B(si , qk )   and                            B(si , qk )
                 hi,ki∈F ∩[0,n]                               hi,ki∈F ∩[0,n]



Then Un and Vn are r.e uniformly in n, Un ր U and U C = n Vn . As µ(Un )
                                                                                T

is lower semi-computable uniformly in n, a sequence (ni )i∈N can be computed
such that µ(Uni ) > 1 − 2−i . Then µ(Vni ) < 2−i , and U C = i Vni is a µ-Martin-
                                                            T

Löf test. Therefore, every µ-random point is in U.                            

proof: (of proposition 6.2.1) let F : D ⊆ X → Y be a morphism. From lemma
6.2.1, every random point is in D which is an intersection of full-measure r.e
open sets.
                  +                                                                          +
Let t : Y → R be the universal ν-test. The function t ◦ F : D → R is
lower semi-computable. Let A be any algorithm lower semi-computing it: the
                                                        +
associated lower semi-computable function fA : X → R extends t ◦ F to the
whole space   X (see lemma 3.2.1). As µ(D) R= 1, t ◦ F Rdµ is well defined and
                                                R

equals fA dµ. As F is measure-preserving, t ◦ F dµ = tdν ≤ 1. Hence fA is
       R

a µ-test. Let x ∈ X be a µ-random point: as x ∈ D, t(F (x)) = fA (x) < +∞,
so F (x) is ν-random.                                                        

Corollary 6.2.1 Let (F, G) : (X , µ) ⇄ (Y, ν) be an isomorphism of com-
putable probability spaces. Then F|Rµ and G|Rν are total computable bijections
between Rµ and Rν , and (F|Rµ )−1 = G|Rν .

In particular:

Corollary 6.2.2 Let δ be a binary representation on a computable probability
space (X , µ). Each point having a µδ -random expansion is µ-random and each
µ-random point has a unique expansion, which is µδ -random.

This proves that algorithmic randomness over a computable probability space
could have been defined encoding points into binary sequences using a binary
representation: this would have led to the same notion of randomness. Using
this principle, a notion of Kolmogorov complexity characterizing Martin-Löf
randomness comes for free. For x ∈ D, define:

                   Hn (x) = H(ω0..n−1) and Γn (x) = δ([ω0..n−1])

where ω is the expansion of x and H is the prefix Kolmogorov complexity.

Corollary 6.2.3 Let δ be a binary representation on a computable probability
space (X , µ). Then x is µ-random if and only if there is c such that for all n:

                                  Hn (x) ≥ − log µ(Γn (x)) − c


                                                27
All this allows to treat algorithmic randomness within probability theory over
general metric spaces. In [22] for instance, it is applied to show that in ergodic
systems over metric spaces, algorithmically random points are well-behaved:
they are typical with respect to any ergodic endomorphism of computable
probability space, generalizing what has been proved in [23] for the Cantor
space.



Aknowledgments


We would like to thank Stefano Galatolo, Peter Gács and Giuseppe Longo for
useful comments and remarks.


References


[1] P. Martin-Löf, The definition of random sequences, Information and Control
    9 (6) (1966) 602–619.

[2] A. Edalat, The Scott topology induces the weak topology, in: LICS ’96:
    Proceedings of the 11th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer
    Science, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 1996, p. 372.

[3] K. Weihrauch, Computability on the probability measures on the borel sets of
    the unit interval, Theoretical Computer Science 219 (1999) 421–437.

[4] M. Schröder, Admissible representations of probability measures., Electronic
    Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 167 (2007) 61–78.

[5] P. Gács, Uniform test of algorithmic randomness over a general space,
    Theoretical Computer Science 341 (2005) 91–137.

[6] P. Hertling, K. Weihrauch, Randomness spaces, in: K. G. Larsen, S. Skyum,
    G. Winskel (Eds.), Automata, Languages and Programming, Vol. 1443 of
    Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer, Berlin, 1998, pp. 796–807, 25th
    International Colloquium, ICALP’98, Aalborg, Denmark, July 1998.

[7] P. Hertling, K. Weihrauch, Random elements in effective topological spaces with
    measure, Information and Computation 181 (1) (2003) 32–56.

[8] A. Hemmerling, Effective metric spaces and representations of the reals, Theor.
    Comput. Sci. 284 (2) (2002) 347–372.

[9] S. Abramsky, A. Jung, Domain theory, in: S. Abramsky, D. Gabbay, T. S. E.
    Maibaum (Eds.), Handbook of Logic in Computer Science Volume 3, Oxford
    University Press, 1994, pp. 1–168.
    URL citeseer.ist.psu.edu/abramsky94domain.html


                                       28
[10] K.-I. Ko, H. Friedman, Computational complexity of real functions, Theoretical
     Computer Science 20 (3) (1982) 323–352.

[11] K.-I. Ko, Complexity Theory of Real Functions, Birkhauser Boston Inc.,
     Cambridge, MA, USA, 1991.

[12] K. Weihrauch, Computable Analysis, Springer, Berlin, 2000.

[13] J. Hartley Rogers, Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Computability,
     MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1987.

[14] V. Brattka, K. Weihrauch, Computability on subsets of euclidean space i: Closed
     and compact subsets, Theor. Comput. Sci. 219 (1-2) (1999) 65–93.

[15] V. Brattka, G. Presser, Computability on subsets of metric spaces, Theoretical
     Computer Science 305 (2003) 43–76.

[16] P. Billingsley, Convergence of Probability Measures, John Wiley, New York,
     1968.

[17] L. Ambrosio, N. Gigli, G. Savaré, Gradient flows: in metric spaces and in the
     space of probability measures, Birkhauser, Zürich, 2005.

[18] S. Galatolo, M. Hoyrup, C. Rojas, A constructive Borel-Cantelli lemma.
     Constructing orbits with required statistical properties, Submitted.
     URL http://arxiv.org/abs/0709.0907

[19] M. Yasugi, T. Mori, Y. Tsujii, Effective properties of sets and functions in metric
     spaces with computability stqucture, Theoretical Computer Science 219 (1-2)
     (1999) 467–486.

[20] V. Brattka, Computable versions of Baire’s category theorem, in: MFCS:
     Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science, 2001.

[21] V. Vovk, V. Vyugin, On the empirical validity of the bayesian method, Journal
     of the Royal Statistical Society B 55 (1) (1993) 253–266.

[22] S. Galatolo, M. Hoyrup, C. Rojas, Effective symbolic dynamics, random points,
     statistical behavior, complexity and entropy, Submitted.
     URL http://arxiv.org/abs/0801.0209

[23] V. V. V’yugin, Effective convergence in probability and an ergodic theorem for
     individual random sequences, SIAM Theory of Probability and Its Applications
     42 (1) (1997) 39–50.




                                          29
