                                           ODOMETERS AND TOEPLITZ SYSTEMS REVISITED IN THE
                                                  CONTEXT OF SARNAK’S CONJECTURE


                                                            TOMASZ DOWNAROWICZ AND STANISLAW KASJAN
arXiv:1502.02307v1 [math.DS] 8 Feb 2015




                                                   Abstract. Although Sarnak’s conjecture holds for compact group rotations
                                                   (irrational rotations, odometers), it is not even known whether it holds for all
                                                   Jewett-Krieger models of such rotations. In this paper we show that it does,
                                                   as long as the model is at the same a topological extension. In particular, we
                                                   reestablish (after [AKL]) that regular Toeplitz systems satisfy Sarnak’s con-
                                                   jecture, and, as another consequence, so do all generalized Sturmian subshifts
                                                   (not only the classical Sturmian subshift). We also give an example of an
                                                   irregular Toeplitz subshift which fits our criterion. We give an example of a
                                                   model of an odometer which is not even Toeplitz (it is weakly mixing), hence
                                                   does not fit our criterion. However, for this example, we manage to produce
                                                   a separate proof of Sarnak’s conjecture. Next, we provide a class of Toeplitz
                                                   sequences which fail Sarnak’s conjecture (in a weak sense); all these examples
                                                   have positive entropy. Finally, we examine the example of a Toeplitz sequence
                                                   from [AKL] (which fails Sarnak’s conjecture in the strong sense) and prove
                                                   that it has positive entropy, as well (this proof has been announced in [AKL]).
                                                   This paper can be considered a sequel to [AKL], it also fills some gaps of [D].




                                                                               1. Introduction
                                             This note results from the discussions the authors held with Mariusz Lemańczyk
                                          about topological (in particular symbolic) models of odometers in the context of
                                          Sarnak’s conjecture. We refer the readers to the recent paper of Lemańczyk et al
                                          [AKL] for results concerning Sarnak’s conjecture for Morse systems, where some
                                          indispensable facts concerning regular Toeplitz subshifts were obtained partly in-
                                          dependently and partly jointly, and inspired this work.
                                             First of all, it has been discovered that although regular Toeplitz subshifts are the
                                          best known symbolic models (the precise meaning of a “model” will be given in the
                                          next section) of odometers, there are also other possibilities, the existence of which
                                          was not fully realized before. In the preceding work of the first author [D] there are
                                          some erroneous statements about regularity, and this note fixes them; there exist
                                          irregular Toeplitz models of their underlying odometers. For completeness, we also
                                          give examples of models which are not even Toeplitz (in fact topologically mixing).
                                          Sarnak’s conjecture can be shortly proved for both regular and irregular Toeplitz
                                          models, as long as they are topological extensions of the modeled odometers. The
                                          method uses the sole property of the Möbius function, that it is orthogonal to any
                                          periodic sequence, otherwise it relies on an easy spectral argument. As a digres-
                                          sion, we apply a similar spectral method (but a different property of the Möbius

                                             2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary: 37B05; Secondary: 37B10, 37A35, 11Y35.
                                             Key words and phrases. Odometer, Toeplitz flow, Almost 1-1 extension, Möbius function,
                                          Sarnak’s conjecture, Entropy.
                                                                                          1
2                   TOMASZ DOWNAROWICZ AND STANISLAW KASJAN


function) to prove Sarnak’s conjecture for isomorphic extensions of other equicon-
tinuous systems, in particular for generalized Sturmian subshifts. Our method fails
for other (e.g. topologically weakly mixing) models of equicontinuous systems and
the case remains a challenge. Nonetheless, we are able to successfully apply it to
our topologically mixing example. By this occasion we also give relatively simple
examples of Toeplitz subshifts which massively fail Sarnak’s conjecture (at many
points including Toeplitz sequences), showing that just being a union of periodic
sequences is insufficient. We also copy from [AKL] an example in which a Toeplitz
sequence fails the conjecture so bad that the limit inferior of the absolute values of
the averages is positive. As one might expect, the counterexamples have positive
entropy, of which we give detailed proofs (which are skipped in [AKL]).

                       2. Preliminaries on Toeplitz systems
   The notation and terminology of this section is consistent with that of [D], where
we also refer for references to earlier papers. To make this paper selfcontained, the
most crucial definitions will be repeated. By a scale we mean an increasing sequence
of positive integers H = (pk )k≥1 such that pk |pk+1 for every k. The adding machine
with scale H is the topological group G obtained as the inverse limit of the cyclic
groups Zpk = Z/pk Z:
                                              ←−
                                         G = lim Zpk .
                                                k

By an odometer we will mean the topological dynamical system (G, τ ) where τ
is the homeomorphism g 7→ g + 1 of G into itself, where 1 = (1, 1, . . . ) is the
topological generator of G. The odometer is minimal, equicontinuous and zero-
dimensional, and the conjunction of these three properties characterizes odometers
among topological dynamical systems. Odometers are uniquely ergodic, with the
Haar measure λ being the unique invariant measure. For us, an odometer also
means the ergodic system (G, λ, τ ). By a (Jewett–Krieger) model of an ergodic
system we will understand any strictly ergodic (minimal and uniquely ergodic)
topological dynamical system isomorphic (for its unique invariant measure1) to
the given ergodic system. Note that there may (and usually do) exist mutually not
conjugate models of the same ergodic system. For instance, an odometer is a model
for itself, but there are other models as well, for example some symbolic systems
over finite alphabets (which are never equicontinuous, so they cannot be conjugate
to the odometer).
    We will be mostly concerned with Toeplitz systems2, understood slightly more
generally than usually, i.e., we will not require that they are symbolic, nonetheless,
all our examples will be symbolic. Toeplitz systems can be defined in a multitude of
ways, which is captured in the theorem below. The relevant definitions and proofs
can be found in [D] (for the reader’s convenience, the definitions are also given in
footnotes).
Theorem 2.1. The following conditions are equivalent for a topological dynamical
system (X, T ). A system satisfying them is called a Toeplitz system.

    1Convention: isomorphism is measure-theoretic while conjugacy is topological.
   2In the literature they are often called “Toeplitz flows”; we find this notation confusing, as
they are discrete time systems.
                     ODOMETERS AND TOEPLITZ SYSTEMS REVISITED                                      3


    (1) (X, T ) is the orbit closure of a regularly recurrent point3;
    (2) (X, T ) is a minimal almost 1-1 extension4 of an odometer (G, τ );
    (3) (X, T ) is a semicocycle extension5 of an odometer (G, τ ).
   The conditions (1) and (2) are additionally related:
Theorem 2.2. If π is the almost 1-1 factor map from a Toeplitz system (X, T ) to
an odometer (G, τ ) then x ∈ X is regularly recurrent if and only if π −1 (π(x)) = {x}.
   In Theorem 2.1, the odometer (G, τ ) appearing in (2) is the maximal equicon-
tinuous factor 6 of (X, T ). The adding machine G appearing in (3) (with the action
of τ ) is the maximal equicontinuous factor of (X, T ) if and only if the semicocy-
cle has the additional property of being invariant under no rotations 7. Otherwise,
the maximal equicontinuous factor of (X, T ) acts on a quotient group of G8 and
(G, τ ) is not even a factor of (X, T ) (let alone maximal equicontinuous). We can
strengthen condition (3) as follows:
Theorem 2.3. Every Toeplitz system is conjugate to a semicocycle extension of
its maximal equicontinuous factor.

   An important class of Toeplitz systems, called regular 9, is described by the con-
ditions given below:
Theorem 2.4. Let π be the almost 1-1 factor map from a Toeplitz system (X, T )
to an odometer (G, τ ). The following conditions are equivalent:
    (1) The set of points g ∈ G such that #π −1 (g) = 1 has full measure λ;
    (2) The set of regularly recurrent points in (X, T ) has full measure for every
        invariant measure on X;
    (3) The set of discontinuities Df of the relevant semicocycle f on G has λ
        measure zero.
   The following is obvious by (1):
Theorem 2.5. A regular Toeplitz system (X, T ) is strictly ergodic and it is isomor-
phic to its maximal equicontinuous factor (G, τ ), and the isomorphism is provided
by the almost 1-1 topological factor map π.
  In particular, a regular Toeplitz system is a model for the underlying odometer.
Unless π is 1-1 everywhere, (X, T ) is not conjugate to (G, τ ).

    3A point x is regularly recurrent if, for every open U 3 x, the set of return times to U contains
an arithmetic progression nZ.
    4The factor map π : X → G is almost 1-1 if π −1 (π(x)) = {x} holds on a residual subset of X.
    5A semicocycle is a function f : G → K into a compact space, which is continuous on a
residual subset of G. Let F denote the multifunction defined by the closure of the graph of f . Let
XF = {x ∈ K Z : (∃g ∈ G)(∀n ∈ Z) x(n) ∈ F (g + n)}. This set is closed and shift-invariant, and
has a unique minimal subset which we denote by Xf . Xf with the action of the shift is called the
semicocycle extension (associated with f ).
    6Any other equicontinuous factor of (X, T ) factors through (G, τ ).
    7A semicocycle f on an adding machine G is invariant under no rotations if F ◦ (· + g) =
F =⇒ g = 0.
    8This quotient group is G/H, where H = {g : F ◦ (· + g) = F }.
    9The coincidence of this term with “regular recurrence” is incidental: the latter term was
coined independently from those who invented “regular Toeplitz systems”.
4                   TOMASZ DOWNAROWICZ AND STANISLAW KASJAN


   In [D] Theorem 13.1 (5) and (6) it is claimed that a strictly ergodic Toeplitz sys-
tem isomorphic to its maximal equicontinuous factor is necessarily regular. More-
over, it is claimed that strict ergodicity need not be assumed if an isomorphism
exists for some invariant measure. Unfortunately, the statement (even with strict
ergodicity assumed) is false. Relevant counterexample is provided in the following
sections.
   Let us return to the general case. In symbolic systems regularly recurrent points
are called Toeplitz sequences 10. Toeplitz subshifts (and Toeplitz sequences) were
the first examples of almost 1-1 extensions of odometers and they are the most
important. In this class we have an additional simplification:
Theorem 2.6. Every Toeplitz subshift over a finite alphabet Λ is conjugate to a
semicocycle extension of its maximal equicontinuous factor with the semicocycle
taking values in Λ.
   The advantage of having the finite-valued semicocycle is that its set of discon-
tinuities Df ⊂ G is then closed. The elements of Toeplitz subshifts have specific
structure, as described below.
Definition 2.7. Let (X, T ) be a Toeplitz subshift and let (G, τ ) be the maximal
equicontinuous factor of (X, T ). For x ∈ X and p ∈ N we denote
                                                                     [
  Perp (x) = {n ∈ Z : (∀m ∈ Z) x(n) = x(n + mp)}, Aper(x) = Z \         Perp (x).
                                                                            p∈N

and call these sets the p-periodic part and aperiodic part, respectively.
   The union of periodic parts will not change if we unite over a scale (pk )k∈N of
the adding machine G (then the union is increasing). It is important to know that
Perpk (x) and Aper(x) depend only on π(x). Clearly, x is a Toeplitz sequence if and
only if its aperiodic part is empty.
   Recall that for a set A ⊂ Z the forward and backward densities of A are de-
fined as dens+ (A) = limn n1 #(A ∩ [0, n − 1]), dens− (A) = limn n1 #(A ∩ [−n, −1]),
respectively (provided the limits exist) and in case they coincide we call them the
density of A and denote by dens(A).
Theorem 2.8. Let (X, T ) be a Toeplitz subshift. Then, for every p ∈ N, dens(Perp (x))
exists and is constant throughout X. Let d = 1 − supk dens(Perpk (x)). Then
    (1) d = λ(Df );
    (2) dens(Aper(x)) ≤ d for every x ∈ X;
    (3) dens(Aper(x)) = d for µ-almost every x ∈ X, for every invariant measure
        µ on X.
   In particular, regularity of (X, T ) is equivalent to d = 0, and to dens(Aper(x)) = 0
at every point.
   Let (X, T ) be an irregular Toeplitz subshift. Consider the set of such points
x ∈ X that dens(Aper(x)) = d (by (3) above, this set has full invariant measure).
Since Aper(x) is constant throughout every fiber of π, our set equals π −1 (E) for
some E ⊂ G. For x ∈ π −1 (E) we enumerate Aper(x) = {ni }i∈Z assuming that the
sequence (ni ) is increasing and letting n0 be the smallest nonnegative element of
    10Regular recurrence takes on the form (∀n ∈ Z)(∃p ∈ N)(∀m ∈ Z) x(n) = x(n + mp).
                  ODOMETERS AND TOEPLITZ SYSTEMS REVISITED                            5


the sequence. We let yx = (x(ni ))i∈Z ∈ ΛZ and call it the aperiodic readout of x.
For g ∈ E we let Yg = {yx : x ∈ π −1 (g)}.
Definition 2.9. We say that the Toeplitz subshift (X, T ) satisfies the condition
SAR ( same aperiodic readouts) if Yg is the same for every g ∈ E. We then denote
the common space Yg by Y .
   It is easy to see that in this case Y is closed and shift invariant. The following
theorem plays the crucial technical role in most of our examples (for proofs see [D]):
Theorem 2.10. Let (X, T ) be an irregular Toeplitz subshift satisfying the condition
SAR. Let Tf be the skew product acting on G × Y given by
                              Tf (g, y) = (τ (g), S g (y)),
where S g equals the shift or the identity, depending on whether g ∈ Df or not,
respectively. Then
    (1) There is a bijection between invariant measures of (X, T ) and invariant
         measures of (G × Y, Tf );
    (2) Every invariant measure on (X, T ) is isomorphic to its corresponding in-
         variant measure on the skew product;
    (3) Every invariant measure on the skew product has marginals λ on G and
         some shift-invariant measure ν on Y ;
    (4) Every shift-invariant measure ν on Y appears as the marginal for at least
         one invariant measure on the skew product (for example for λ × ν);
    (5) The entropy of the skew product with respect to an invariant measure equals
         d times the entropy of the corresponding marginal on Y .
    (6) The topological entropy of the skew product (which equals the topological
         entropy of (X, T )) equals d times the topological entropy of the shift on Y .
  We will refer the the above facts several times.

  3. Preliminaries on the Möbius function and Sarnak’s conjecture
  The Möbius function denoted by µ is defined on positive integers as follows
                   
                    1
                             if n = 1,
           µ(n) =      0      if n has a repeated prime factor,
                          r
                       (−1) if n is a product of r distinct primes.
                   

This function has been introduced by A. F. Möbius in [M] to obtain inversion for-
mulas for arithmetic functions [CDM]. It plays an important role in number theory.
The reader is referred to the rich literature in that area for more information, let
us quote only two fundamental monographs: [P], [W].
Definition 3.1. Let ξ(n) and η(n) be two bounded complex-valued sequences over
N. We say that these sequences are uncorrelated if
                                    n
                                 1X
                             lim       ξ(i)η(i) = 0.
                               n n
                                   i=1

   One of the intriguing properties of the Möbius function is its apparent random-
ness in the distribution of its values. It is well known that the forward density of
square-free numbers (i.e., of the set {n : |µ(n)| = 1}) exists and equals π62 (see [N],
6                    TOMASZ DOWNAROWICZ AND STANISLAW KASJAN


Thm 21.8 and the following Corollary). On the other hand, the densities of posi-
tive and negative values are equal implying that µ is uncorrelated to the constant
sequence (see [P], Thm 5.1).
   Moreover, it is uncorrelated to any periodic function (an elementary proof can
be found in [GL]), a fact which is connected with the laws of the distribution of
primes along arithmetic progressions (see [Sa]). Let us remark that a more detailed
analysis of this phenomenon, more precisely, of the behavior of the partial sums of
the Möbius function, is an important area of study, connected to many fundamental
number theoretical problems, see e.g. classical works [W], [Sch] and more recent
papers [RR], [HS].
   Sarnak [Sa] conjectures that µ is uncorrelated to any sequence obtained by read-
ing any continuous function along any orbit in any topological dynamical system
with topological entropy zero, as follows:
Conjecture 3.2. Let (X, T ) be a topological dynamical system with topological
entropy zero. Let f : X → C be a continuous function. Fix an x ∈ X and let
ξ(n) = f (T n x) (for n ≥ 1). Then ξ and µ are uncorrelated.
   The conjecture is known to hold for relatively few types of dynamical systems,
in particular for odometers, irrational rotations, nilsequences [GT], horocycle flows
[BSZ]. See also [B1], [B], [ALR], [G], [KL], [LS], [MR], for other results. We remark,
that validity of Sarnak’s conjecture for odometers follows directly from the fact that
the Möbius function is uncorrelated to any periodic sequence. The validity for irra-
tional rotations can be proved by a criterion from [BSZ] or by completely different
property of the Möbius function, discovered by Davenport [Da]. It is a folklore fact
that the conjecture holds for the classical Sturmian subshift; the proof uses heavily
the fact that this subshift has complexity11 c(n) = n+1 ([MH]). Recently, in [AKL]
Sarnak’s conjecture has been proved for some Morse subshifts. Every continuous
function on such a system decomposes as the sum of a function depending on the
Toeplitz factor and an orthogonal one. Thus the method relies on two ingredients:
for continuous functions orthogonal to the Toeplitz factor some specific spectral
and disjointness methods are used. To handle the other ingredient the authors
simply prove the conjecture for regular Toeplitz subshifts. In this note we extend
the latter proof (in fact, we only notice that essentially the same proof applies) to
a class slightly larger than regular Toeplitz systems, that of isomorphic extensions
of compact monothetic group rotations. This includes some not necessarily regular
Toeplitz systems and generalized Sturmian subshifts.

              4. Sarnak’s conjecture for isomorphic extensions
    The following fact has been observed jointly by the first author and M. Lemańczyk.
Theorem 4.1. Let (X, T ) and (Y, S) be strictly ergodic topological dynamical sys-
tems, with invariant measures µ and ν, respectively, and let π : X → Y be a
topological factor map which is, at the same time, an isomorphism. If Sarnak’s
conjecture holds for (Y, S) then it also holds for (X, T ).
Proof. Let f : X → C be continuous. Then f ∈ L2 (µ) and f 0 = f ◦ π −1 ∈ L2 (ν) (f 0
                                                                 2
is defined ν-almost everywhere onR Y ). Since C(Y ) is dense in
                                                              R L (ν), there exists a
continuous g 0 : Y → C such that |f 0 − g 0 |2 dν < 2 , hence |f 0 − g 0 | dν < . The
    11the number of words of length n in the subshift
                    ODOMETERS AND TOEPLITZ SYSTEMS REVISITED                                    7


function g = g 0 ◦ π is continuous on X and |f − g| dµ < . Because in strictly
                                               R
                                                         Pn
ergodic systems every point is generic12, we have limn n1 i=1 |f (T i x)−g(T i x)| < ,
for any x ∈ X. Now, we write
          n                     n                    n
       1X                    1X                   1X
             f (T i x)µ(i) ≤       g(T i x)µ(i) +       |f (T i x) − g(T i x)||µ(i)|.
       n i=1                 n i=1                n i=1
                                                       Pn
The first average on the right hand side equals n1 i=1 g 0 (S i y)µ(i) , where y =
π(x), and is small for large n, because Sarnak’s conjecture holds on (Y, S). The
last average does not exceed, for large n, the arbitrarily small . Thus the left hand
side tends zero with growing n.                                                      

   In [AKL] the reader will find a slightly different statement, in which (Y, S) is
assumed coalescent 13 and the assumption that the isomorphism between (X, T )
and (Y, S) is realized by the same topological factor map π is dropped (it is then
fulfilled automatically). Recall that odometers and other ergodic group rotations
are coalescent.
   We now draw conclusions concerning particular types of topological dynamical
systems. It seems that items (1b) and (2) below are new. Notice that for the
classical Sturmian subshift we have obtained a new proof not relying on the exact
complexity.

Corollary 4.2. Sarnak’s conjecture holds for:
    (1) regular semicocycle extensions of any minimal equicontinuous systems14, in
        particular
             (1a) regular Toeplitz systems (see also [AKL]);
             (1b) generalized Sturmian subshifts15;
    (2) some irregular Toeplitz subshifts as in the Example 5.1 below.

Proof. To be absolutely clear, let us argue why does the conjecture hold for minimal
equicontinuous systems. By the Halmos–von Neumann Theorem, every such system
is uniquely ergodic and the space L2 (µ) is spanned by (at most countably many)
continuous eigenfunctions. Thus every continuous function can be approximated
in L2 (µ) (hence also in L1 (µ)) by a finite sum of continuous eigenfunctions. Now,
by an argument as in the preceding proof, it suffices to verify the conjecture for
continuous eigenfunctions. But every such function arises as a continuous function
defined on either an odometer (if the eigenvalue is rational) or an irrational rotation
(otherwise).                                                                          


   12fulfills the ergodic theorem for every continuous function
   13every endomorphism from the system to itself is an isomorphism
   14Notice that semicocycle extensions can be as well defined on any strictly ergodic system, not
necessarily on an odometer. Regularity means that the set of discontinuities of the semicocycle
has measure zero.
   15A classical Sturmian subshift is obtained as the semicocycle extension of the irrational ro-
tation by an angle α, where the semicocycle is precisely the characteristic function of [0, α]. In
generalized Sturmian subshifts the semicocycle is admitted characteristic function of any nonde-
generate subinterval or even a finite union of intervals.
8                  TOMASZ DOWNAROWICZ AND STANISLAW KASJAN


                     5. Examples of models of odometers
Example 5.1. There exist irregular Toeplitz subshifts which are strictly ergodic and
isomorphic (via the same topological factor map) to their maximal equicontinuous
factor odometers (for these Sarnak’s conjecture holds).
Sketch of the construction. An explicit example of such a system is generated by
the (unilateral) Toeplitz sequence described below.
   Pick a block B1 = 000...01000...0 of some length r1 consisting of zeros but one
symbol 1 (somewhere). We place this block p1 -periodically (for some = p1 > r1 ,
we also let q1 = p1 ) (see Figure 1).


0100∗∗∗ 0100∗∗∗ 0100∗∗∗ 0100∗∗∗ 0100∗∗∗ 0100∗∗∗ 0100∗∗∗ 0100∗∗∗ 0100∗∗∗ 0100...

                Figure 1. On this figure B1 = 0100, r1 = 4 and p1 = 7.

   The unfilled places (the stars) come in blocks of length Q1 = q1 − r1 . We pick a
block B2 of some length r2 Q1 , consisting of zeros but one symbol 1. We write this
block into r2 consecutive empty blocks and repeat p2 -periodically, where p2 = q2 p1 ,
for some q2 > r2 (see Figure 2).


0100000 0100100 0100000 0100∗∗∗0100∗∗∗0100∗∗∗0100000 0100100 0100000 0100...

             Figure 2. On this figure B2 = 000100000, r2 = 3 and q2 = 6.

    Now the unfilled positions come in clusters of q2 − r2 blocks of length q1 − r1 .
     We continue in this manner: in step k + 1 we use a block Bk+1 consisting of all
zeros but one symbol 1, whose length equals rk+1 (a freely chosen number) times
Qk = (p1 − r1 )(p2 − r2 ) . . . (pk − rk ) (the number of unfilled positions in [0, pk − 1]
in the so far constructed sequence), we use this block to fill all unfilled places in
[0, rk+1 pk − 1], then we repeat it with a period pk+1 = qk pk for some freely chosen
                                                                          QN
qk > rk . Two more details must be taken care of: the products k=1 (1 − rqkk ),
representing the density of unfilled positions after step N , must converge to a
number d > 0. The second requirement is that for each k the symbol 1 appears in
the future blocks Bk0 (k 0 > k) at positions whose remainders modulo Qk assume
every possible value infinitely many times. With such an arrangement it is not very
hard to see that:
       (1) the generated (bilateral) Toeplitz subshift (X, T ) is an almost 1-1 extension
           of the odometer (G, τ ) with scale H = (pk );
       (2) (X, T ) is irregular and satisfies the condition SAR with the space Y of
           aperiodic readouts consisting of all {0, 1}-valued sequences having at most
           one symbol 1.
Clearly, Y supports only one invariant measure ν, the pointmass at the fixpoint
(. . . 000 . . . ). Theorem 2.10 (1)–(3) implies that (X, T ) is uniquely ergodic, the
unique invariant measure µ is isomorphic to the only measure with marginals λ
and ν, which is λ × ν. Since ν is supported by one point, the factor map π provides
an isomorphism between µ and λ, as required. 
                   ODOMETERS AND TOEPLITZ SYSTEMS REVISITED                                 9


   There exist strictly ergodic systems (also subshifts) isomorphic to an odometer
(G, τ ), yet whose maximal equicontinuous factor (G0 , τ 0 ) is a proper factor of (G, τ )
and Theorem 4.1 does not apply to such systems. For G which is not simple16, such
examples are easily obtained with G0 being an adding machine and the system is an
almost 1-1 extension of (G0 , τ 0 ), while the remaining eigenvalues of G are realized
by discontinuous eigenfunctions (see [DL]). There exist also models for which the
maximal equicontinuous factor is trivial (hence all eigenvalues of (G, τ ) are realized
by discontinuous eigenfunctions and the system is topologically weakly mixing).
Such examples can be produced for all odometers, including the simple ones. Below
we give an example with even stronger property of topological mixing.17
Example 5.2. Given an odometer (G, τ ), there exists a strictly ergodic topologically
mixing subshift (X, T ) isomorphic to (G, τ ).
Sketch of the construction. Since we will be dealing with subshifts, T will always
denote the shift transformation, regardless of the domain. Let H = (pk ) denote
the scale of the odometer. Let (X0 , T ) be a regular Toeplitz subshift with max-
imal equicontinuous factor (G, τ ), and let x0 ∈ X0 be a Toeplitz sequence. We
will produce a sequence of topological conjugacies of (X0 , T ), converging almost
everywhere to an isomorphism with the desired subshift (X, T ).
   In step 1, choose some r1 ∈ N and find all periodic repetitions in x0 of the central
block C1 = x0 [−r1 , r1 ]. The period of the repetitions is some p1 ∈ H. Choose q1
such that p1 q1 ∈ H and choose every q1 th periodic occurrence of C1 in x0 (avoiding
the central one). Let us call these places 1-windows. Now comes the modification:
within each 1-window we shift the contents one position to the left (sending the
leftmost symbol to the right end). The modification passes over, in an obvious way,
to all elements of X0 and is invertible if q1 is large enough18. This is our conjugacy
Φ1 : X0 → X1 between two Toeplitz subshifts. We denote by x1 the Toeplitz
sequence Φ1 (x0 ).
   In step 2 we choose some r2 and we denote C2 = x1 [−r2 , r2 ]. We must take care
of two details: C2 must be long enough to include several 1-windows, moreover, its
ends must fall far from the 1-windows, for instance, approximately in the middle
between two of them. In the future this will prevent an accumulation of the end-
irregularities. We find all periodic occurrences of C2 in x1 , and their period p2 ∈ H.
Next we choose some large q2 such that p2 q2 ∈ H and we mark every q2 th copy of
C2 in x2 (avoiding the central one) as 2-windows. Like before, we shift the contents
of each 2-window one position to the left, sending the leftmost symbol to the right
end. This modification spreads naturally to a conjugacy Φ2 : X1 → X2 between
Toeplitz subshifts. We let x2 = Φ2 (x1 ) = Φ2 Φ1 (x0 ).
   We proceed in this manner infinitely many times, assuring that the densities of
the positions affected by consecutive modifications (i.e., the ratios ρk = 2rpkkq+1
                                                                                 k
                                                                                    ) are
summable, and that the ends of the k-windows fall, for every k 0 < k approximately
in the middle between the a pair k 0 -windows (see Figure 3).

   16An odometer is simple when its scale is (pk ) for a prime number p. Simple odometers have
no infinite proper factors, other do.
   17It is known ([L]) that every aperiodic ergodic system has a topologically mixing strictly
ergodic model. Here we provide a particular example.
   18q must be long enough so that the p -periodic part of any x ∈ X can be determined by
       1                                     1                       0
viewing any block of length p1 q1 − 2r1 − 1.
10                    TOMASZ DOWNAROWICZ AND STANISLAW KASJAN




           Figure 3. The colors show the k-windows (i.e., areas affected by Φk ):
           original – black, 1-windows – red, 2-windows – green, 3-windows – blue
           (the next 3-window too far to be shown). The shift by one position of
           red within green, and that of green and red within blue are to small to
           be seen.


   Let x∞ denote the sequence obtained as the limit of xk (which exists because
every position in x0 is affected by the modifications at most finitely many times),
and we let X∞ be the shift orbit closure of x∞ and finally X, a minimal subset
of X∞ .19 Notice that the maps Ψk = Φk . . . Φ2 Φ1 converge at every point of X0
whose every coordinate is affected at most finitely many times. We let Ψ be the
(partially defined) limit map on X0 .
   The following observations are standard and we skip their proofs:
      (1) (X∞ , T ) is topologically mixing (can be checked directly by the definition).
      (2) Ψ is defined almost everywhere on X0 and acts into X∞ .
      (3) For each k, on X we can define the following map ψk : in each element of
          X we can easily identify and reverse the consequences of the modification
          Φ1 , Φ2 , Φ3 , . . . , Φk (although we “invert” Φk in a seemingly wrong order,
          these inverses commute). Attention: the maps ψk are not precisely inverses
          of Ψk ; they are defined on X∞ , not on Xk .
      (4) The limit of the above maps ψk (call it ψ) is defined almost everywhere on
          X∞ for every invariant measure.
      (5) The range of ψ is contained in X0 and ψ inverts Ψ wherever the latter is
          defined.
The last four facts imply that (X∞ , T ) is uniquely ergodic and isomorphic to
(X0 , T ). Since the minimal subset X ⊂ X∞ supports an invariant measure, it
supports the unique one, hence (X, T ) is isomorphic to (X0 , T ) and, additionally,
minimal. Thus (X, T ) is the desired example. 
  Although we have no general proof of Sarnak’s conjecture for all models of
odometers, interestingly, it does hold in the above topologically mixing example.
Again, we will only sketch the argument.
Sketch of proof of Sarnak’s conjecture in Example 5.2. Since every continuous
function on X can be approximated in L1 (µ) by a (continuous) linear combination
of characteristic functions of cylinders corresponding to finite blocks, it suffices to
verify the conjecture for such characteristic functions. We will do that for blocks of
length 1, i.e., for the occurrences of the symbol 1. The argument for longer blocks
is identical.
    Fix anP > 0 and let k be such that the density of places where x∞ differs from
             ∞
xk (i.e., k0 =k+1 ρk0 ) is less than . Since xk is regular Toeplitz, there are l and
N such that the pl -periodic part occupies a fraction at least 1 −  in every block
of length N appearing in any element of Xk . The problem we are facing is that
the (slightly perturbed) pl -periodic part in x ∈ X does not come from a continuous

     19This step allows us to avoid verifying whether X
                                                      ∞ is minimal.
                        ODOMETERS AND TOEPLITZ SYSTEMS REVISITED                                                11


function on X any more, and we have no guarantee that all points realize the
ergodic theorem for it. We need more subtle observations.
   We can assume that N is large enough so that
                                              n
                                              X
                                                     ξ(i)µ(i) < n
                                               i=1

for every {0, 1}-valued pl -periodic sequence ξ and every n ≥ N . Let x ∈ X and
consider the initial block x[1, n] for n ≥ N (this is an arbitrary block B of length n
appearing in x∞ ). We will argue that there are (at most) three blocks B1 , B2 , B3
appearing in Xk , with lengths summing to n, such that x[1, n] nearly equals the
concatenation B1 B2 B3 in the sense that the fraction of disagreements is at most
2. Once this is proved, we can write B1 = x0 [1, m], B2 = x00 [m + 1, m0 ], B3 =
x000 [m0 + 1, n] for some x0 , x00 , x000 ∈ Xk and m, m0 ∈ [1, n], m ≤ m0 , and then have
the following estimation
                                                            0
        n                          m                       m                       n
        X                    2n   X
                                          0
                                                           X                       X
                  x(i)µ(i) ≈             x (i)µ(i) +              x00 (i)µ(i) +             x000 (i)µ(i) =
            i=1                    i=1                    i=m+1                   i=m0 +1
                         0                                                                    0
m
X                      m
                       X                      m
                                              X                     n
                                                                    X                   m
                                                                                        X
        0                     00                     00                    000
       x (i)µ(i) +           x (i)µ(i) −            x (i)µ(i) +           x (i)µ(i) −             x000 (i)µ(i) < 10n,
 i=1                   i=1                    i=1                   i=1                     i=1

because
        • the sums shorter than N contribute at most sN < sn (s ≤ 4 is the number
          of such sums),
        • in each sum not shorter than N
             – x0 , x00 or x000 can be replaced by a pl -periodic sequence and this will
               change the sum by less than  times the summing length,
             – once the above replacement is done, the absolute value of the sum does
               not exceed  times the summing length,
        • the sum of the summing lengths equals (5 − s)n.
   Clearly, this estimation ends the proof.
   So, it remains to break a block B of length n appearing in x∞ into at most three
subblocks, as desired. We can think of B as of a block B0 appearing somewhere
in xk , affected by some finitely many modifications Φk+1 , . . . , ΦK . If B is entirely
contained in a K-window without its endpoints, then ΦK shifts the entire contents
one position to the left, so that the result is the same as if we started from the block
B00 lying in xk one position to the left with respect to B0 and pretended that ΦK
did not affect it. In this manner, we can ignore all such cases and move on to the
largest index (and denote this one by K) for which only part of B is affected by ΦK ,
that is, B contains an endpoint of a K-window. Now there are three possibilities:
    (1) B intersects two or more K-windows,
    (2) B contains one or both endpoints of just one K-window.
In case (1) the fraction of modifications introduced by ΦK in B is at most 2ρK (and
ρk0 for earlier modifications with k 0 = k + 1, . . . , K − 1), so B differs from B0 on a
fraction of at most 2 places and there is no need to partition it (we put B1 = B0 ,
there is no B2 or B3 ). In case (2) we cut B at the endpoints of the K-window.
This produces two or three subblocks B10 , B20 , B30 . Notice that ΦK affects only one
12                TOMASZ DOWNAROWICZ AND STANISLAW KASJAN


of these subblocks and only by shifting it “in one piece”. So, we only need to see
how much each subblock is affected by the earlier modifications. Recall that for
each k 0 < K the endpoints of the k 0 -windows fall approximately pk02qk0 places away
from the endpoints of the K-window. This implies that if a modification Φk0 does
affect a subblock Bi0 (i = 1, 2 or 3), then the fraction of the modifications in this
subblock is at most 2ρk0 . So each Bi0 differs from a subblock of xk on a fraction of
at most 2 places. This completes the argument.                                    

         6. Toeplitz sequences which fail Sarnak’s conjecture
  We will say that sequences P ξ and η are weakly (resp. strongly) correlated if the
                                 n
upper (resp. lower) limit of n1 i=1 ξ(i)η(i) is positive.
6.1. Weak failure.
Example 6.1. There exists an irregular {−1, 1}-valued Toeplitz subshift X such
that some x ∈ X are strongly correlated with µ. The set of such points x is dense
in X. Moreover, weak correlation holds on a residual subset of X.
The example is very simple, once the general construction of Toeplitz systems is
understood: Consider an irregular Toeplitz subshift satisfying the condition SAR
and such that Y , (the space of aperiodic readouts) is the full shift on two symbols
{−1, 1} (we skip the detailed construction of such a subshift; it is done by a “stan-
dard method” e.g., the Oxtoby technique, see [D]). Let π : X → G denote the
maximal equicontinuous factor map onto the underlying adding machine and let λ
be the Haar measure on G. Then, by Theorem 2.8 (and the explanations following
that theorem), there is a set G0 ⊂ G with λ(G0 ) = 1 which satisfy the following two
conditions:
    (1) all points x in the fiber π −1 (g) agree along a common periodic part whose
        density equals 1 − d,
    (2) as x ranges over π −1 (g), all possible {−1, 1}-valued sequences occur along
        the aperiodic part of x.
In particular, if we arrange that d > 1 − π32 (≈ 0.7) (which is easily done within
the “standard method”) then, for every g ∈ G0 and x ∈ π −1 (g) the set A =
Aper(x) ∩ {n ≥ 0 : µ(n) 6= 0} has positive lower forward density at least d0 =
d + π62 − 1 > π32 . There exists a point x0 ∈ π −1 (g) such that for n ∈ A it equals
µ(n). It is obvious that (even in the “worst case scenario”, when x(i) = −µ(i) and
|µ(i)| = 1 everywhere on the periodic part of x) we still have
                                  n
                               1X
(6.1)                lim inf         x0 (i)µ(i) ≥ d0 − (1 − d) > 0.
                       n       n i=1
   Next, we will show that points x0 as constructed above (satisfying (6.1)) lie
densely in X. Consider a basic open set U in X, i.e., a cylinder corresponding to
a block B ∈ {−1, 1}2k+1 occurring in X at the coordinates [−k, k]. By minimality,
the same block occurs (perhaps at a different place) in the generating Toeplitz
sequence, which implies that the same block occurs somewhere in the periodic part
of every element of X, in particular in an element x ∈ π −1 (G0 ). Notice (directly
from the definition) that the set G0 is invariant (equivalently, π −1 (G0 ) is shift-
invariant). Thus, by an appropriate shifting, we obtain a new point x such that B
occurs in x at the coordinates [−k, k] and still belongs to the periodic part of x,
                  ODOMETERS AND TOEPLITZ SYSTEMS REVISITED                           13


and g = π −1 (x) belongs to G0 . Using this particular g in the above construction of
x0 we produce the point x0 such that x0 [−k, k] = B (x0 belongs to the same fiber
as x and thus agrees with x along the periodic part, which includes the coordinates
[−k, k]). In other words, we have constructed a point x0 ∈ U satisfying (6.1).
   Next we observe that if we weaken (6.1) by requiring that the upper limit is
larger than or equal to a positive  < d0 − (1 − d), then it holds on a residual set.
Indeed, we can write


  (                  n
                                    )
                  1X
      x : lim sup       x(i)µ(i) >  ⊂
             n    n i=1
                                   (      n
                                                         )
                           \ [         1X
                                    x:       x(i)µ(i) >  ⊂
                                       n i=1
                          m≥1 n≥m
                                                 (               n
                                                                                )
                                                              1X
                                                  x : lim sup       x(i)µ(i) ≥  .
                                                         n    n i=1


The first set contains the dense set of points satisfying (6.1), the middle set is of
type Gδ (hence it is a dense Gδ ) and thus the last set is residual. The example is
completed. 


  Since Toeplitz sequences form a residual subset inside a Toeplitz subshift, we
conclude that

Corollary 6.2. There exist (irregular) Toeplitz sequences weakly correlated with
the Möbius function.

   We remark, that the Toeplitz subshift of the above example has positive entropy
(equal to d ln 2), hence it stands in no collision with the Sarnak’s conjecture.




6.2. Strong failure. The following example is replicated from [AKL].

Example 6.3. There exists a one-sided Toeplitz sequence strongly correlated with
the Möbius function.

We begin by describing a general scheme (used in [AKL]) of producing a one-sided
Toeplitz sequence from another symbolic sequence. Let y = (yn )n≥1 be a one-
sided sequence over a finite alphabet Λ. Let H = (pk ) be a scale of an adding
         P that p1 ≥ 3. Since pk+1 ≥ 2pk for every k, this condition implies
machine such
that ρ = k≥1 p1k < 1. We define the associated one-sided Toeplitz sequence x as
14                      TOMASZ DOWNAROWICZ AND STANISLAW KASJAN


follows:                            
                                    
                                       y1 ,       n = 1 mod p1
                                    
                                        y2 ,       n = 2 mod p2
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                     .
                                      ..
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                       yp1 ,       n = p1 mod pp1
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    yp +1 , n = p1 + 2 mod pp1 +1
                                    
                                            1
                           xy (n) =
                                    
                                      y  p 1 +2
                                                 , n = p1 + 3 mod pp1 +2
                                    
                                    
                                      .
                                       ..
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                        y2p1 −1 , n = 2p1 mod p2p1 −1
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                     y   2p1 ,    n = 2p1 + 3 mod p2p1
                                    
                                    .
                                     .
                                      .
We refrain from further detailed listing, as it becomes too complicated. The simple
rule behind the scheme is that yk is placed at the first position available after steps
1, 2, . . . , k−1 and then it is repeated periodically with the period pk . This concludes
the description of the scheme.
    For further considerations, it will be convenient to highlight, for each k, the first
placement of yk in xy (it is shown in boldface, while its further periodic repetitions
are printed in the normal font). While reading the following text and diagrams it
is important to distinguish between boldface symbols yk and normal font symbols
yk . The diagram below shows the filling scheme in case pk = 3k with the boldface
terms marked.
y1 y2 y3 y1 y4 y5 y1 y6 y7 y1 y2 y8 y1 y9 y10 y1 y11 y12 y1 y2 y13 y1 y14 y15 y1 y16 y17 y1 y2 y3 y1 y18 y19 y1 y20 ...


The authors of [AKL] show that the lower density of the boldface symbols (which
they call initials) is at least 1 − ρ (combining this with Lemma 7.1 (3) below we
see that in fact these symbols have density 1 − ρ), which can be made arbitrarily
close to 1. They select y so that xy (n) = µ(n) whenever xy (n) is a boldface
symbol. If 1 − ρ > 1 − π32 then, for the same reasons as in (6.1) (with 1 − ρ in
the role of d), they obtain that x is strongly correlated with µ. Of course, in view
of Sarnak’s conjecture, one is obliged to compute the topological entropy of the
generated Toeplitz subshift (at least to check whether it is positive). We will do so
in Section 8. 

                                   7. Properties of the scheme
    We are interested in properties of Toeplitz sequences obtained through the above
scheme for general sequences y. In particular, we would like to know whether
positive entropy follows automatically from positive entropy of the orbit closure Y
of y. As we soon show, the answer is negative. This is quite unfortunate, because
it forces us to estimate the entropy of the example of [AKL] using tedious methods
adapted the the particular example.
   So, consider a general sequence y and the associated Toeplitz sequence xy with
the boldface symbols marked. The following lemma addresses the distribution of
the boldface symbols in xy . The statement (5) will be used immediately in Example
                   ODOMETERS AND TOEPLITZ SYSTEMS REVISITED                             15


7.3, while statement (4) only in Section 8. Statements (1) and (2) are necessary to
prove (4), while (3) is just a digression noted in passing.
Lemma 7.1. Let z be the {0, 1}-valued sequence given by the rule z(n) = 1 ⇐⇒
xy (n) is a boldface symbol. Then
    (1) The frequency of zeros in the block Bk,0 = z[1, pk ] converges to ρ from
         below, as k → ∞.
    (2) For every k every block of the form Bk,j = Bk,j [1, pk ] = z[jpk + 1, (j + 1)pk ]
         (n ≥ 0) can be obtained from Bk,0 by only replacing some 1’s by 0’s.
    (3) The symbols 0 in z have lower Banach density ρ.
    (4) Given  > 0 there is a δ > 0 and n0 ∈ N, such that, for any n ≥ n0 , the
         cardinality of different blocks B of length n, appearing in z and in which
         the frequency of 0’s is at most ρ + δ, does not exceed 2n .
    (5) For every natural m, z contains a block consisting of m single symbols 1
         separated by blocks of zeros of lengths at least m. In particular, the upper
         Banach density of zeros in z is 1.
Remark 7.2. (3) and (5) imply that the subshift generated by z is not uniquely
ergodic; at least one invariant measure assigns to the cylinder of 0 the value ρ and
at least one – the value 1 (perhaps there are more possibilities). (4) implies that
every measure of the first kind has entropy zero. We have not verified whether this
subshift has topological entropy zero (regardless of the scale H = (pk )).
Proof. For (1) it suffices to observe that the frequency of zeros in Bk,0 equals
                             X               X 
                          1       pk                1
                         pk     ( p 0 − 1) =       p0 − k−1
                                                         pk .
                                    k                  k
                            k0 <k              k0 <k

Indeed, in step k 0 ≤ k, in xy [1, pk ] we have placed ppk0 symbols, of which one was
                                                          k
boldface. Hence the formula.
   For (2) note that Bk,0 (i) = 0 if and only if xy (i) is a normal font (i.e., repeated)
symbol yk0 for some k 0 . This is possible only when pk0 < pk . But then pk is a
multiple of pk0 which implies that Bk,j (i) = 0 for every j.
   Clearly, (1) implies that the lower density (and lower Banach density) of zeros is
at most ρ. By (2), the frequency of 0’s in any Bk,j may only be larger than that in
Bk,0 (which is close to ρ). Every sufficiently long block B in z is a concatenation
of the blocks Bk,j and negligibly small prefix and suffix, so the frequency of 0’s in
B is not less than ρ minus a negligibly small error term. This proves (3).
   For (4) we argue as above: every block B of large length n, after removing
negligibly small prefix and suffix, becomes a concatenation of the blocks Bk,j (with a
large parameter k). By (2), this concatenation can be viewed as a periodic repetition
of Bk,0 with some 1’s replaced by 0’s. But the number of replaced symbols 1 cannot
essentially exceed nδ, otherwise the overall frequency of 0’s would be too large. Such
a replacement can be performed in approximately en(−δ ln δ−(1−δ) ln(1−δ)) different
ways, which, for an appropriately small δ, is smaller than 2n .
   For (5), we will need the following (somewhat lengthy)
Claim. For every m ≥ 1, after some number km of steps of filling xy (i.e., after
having placed the periodic repetitions of y1 , . . . , ykm ), xy starts with the following
configuration (later referred to as C): a continuous entirely filled block (with both
boldface and normal font symbols) ending with the boldface ykm followed by a
16                 TOMASZ DOWNAROWICZ AND STANISLAW KASJAN


single unfilled coordinate, next a continuous block filled with normal font terms
followed by a single unfilled position, next again a continuous block filled with
normal font terms followed by a single unfilled position, and so on. The continuous
filled blocks (including the first one) have strictly decreasing lengths and there is
m of them (see the diagram below for m = 6, most of the indices are omitted). We
do not require that the last unfilled position is single (it may be followed by more
unfilled positions).
              y1 y y y y y y ykm y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y y

Proof of the Claim. For m = 1 the condition is fulfilled after k1 = 1 steps, so
the induction starts. Suppose the claim holds for some m ≥ 1. The pattern C
is repeated periodically with the period pkm and the repetitions cannot overlap
(because the lengths of the filled blocks are all different). This implies that the
pattern C is contained in xy [1, pkm ]. Let us move to the first repetition of the
pattern C further to the right (call it C 0 ). It starts at the position pkm +1 and clearly,
here all symbols are printed in normal font. Notice that at least two preceding
positions: pkm and pkm − 1 are not occupied (because pkm = 0 mod pk and pkm −
1 = pk − 1 mod pk for any k ≤ km , while the positions filled with the symbol yk
have values mod pk positive and much smaller than pk ). Now we perform the
construction steps km + 1, km + 2, etc., of filling in xy , until we fill the position
pkm − 1 (with a boldface symbol yk0 for some k 0 > km ). Notice that the pattern
C 0 reaches to at most the position 2pkm , which is smaller than pkm +1 + 1, so the
repeated (normal font) symbols added in these new steps fall to the right of C 0
(i.e., they do not affect it). In this manner we fill all the unfilled positions within
xy [1, pkm − 1] creating (together with C 0 ) a pattern as required for m + 1 in the
induction (with km+1 = k 0 ). Note that the new initial continuously filled block
xy [1, pkm − 1] has length pkm − 1 larger than or equal to the length of the pattern
C 0 (perhaps without counting its last empty cell), in particular, for m > 1, it is
strictly longer than the first completely filled block of C 0 . For m = 1 this also
holds, because, in this case, the length of the first (and unique) filled block of C 0 is
1, while p1 − 1 > 1. The claim is thus proved.
    In the following construction steps, the unfilled positions in the pattern C are
filled with the boldface symbols ykm +1 , ykm +2 , . . . , ykm +m . Because the lengths of
the separating normal font blocks strictly decrease, and there is m − 1 of them,
the first one has length at least m − 1, the next one m − 2 and so on. Thus,
taking for simplicity m to be even, we obtain that each of the boldface terms
ykm +1 , ykm +2 , . . . , ykm + m2 is followed (and preceded) by a block of normal font
symbols of length at least m                     m
                                   2 . Renaming 2 as m ends the proof.                  
   It follows from the construction (or we can easily arrange it by choosing a sub-
sequence) that km+1 > km + m for each m ≥ 1.
Example 7.3. There exists a one-sided symbolic sequence y such that its orbit
closure Y has positive topological entropy and supports many invariant measures,
yet the associated Toeplitz subshift Xy (the orbit closure of xy ) is strictly ergodic
with entropy zero.
We just need to decide about the contents of the sequence y. Let Λ = {0, 1}. For
each m ≥ 1 we let y[km + 1, km + m] be a block Am and y[km + m + 1, km+1 ]
be the block consisting entirely of zeros. We arrange that the sequence of blocks
                   ODOMETERS AND TOEPLITZ SYSTEMS REVISITED                             17


(Am )m≥1 generates a positive entropy subshift Y0 with many invariant measures
(for example, the full shift on two symbols). It is clear that the orbit-closure Y of
y contains Y0 , hence has positive entropy and many invariant measures.
      Let us ignore “accidental” periodic repetitions of symbols in xy . This is to say,
we will denote by Perk (xy ) the set of positions of the pk0 -periodic repetitions of the
                                                                    Pk
symbols yk0 for k 0 ≤ k. The density of so defined Perk (xy ) is k0 =1 p1 0 .
                                                                            k
      It follows from the general facts concerning Toeplitz subshifts, that if µ is an
invariant measure on Xy , then µ-almost every x ∈ Xy has the “non-accidental”
periodic part of density ρ < 1, and the remaining part (which we denote by Aper(x),
although at the moment we only know it contains the true aperiodic part). Clearly,
Aper(x) is infinite as it has density 1 − ρ.
      Suppose Aper(x) contains two positions n and n + m such that x(n) = x(n +
m) = 1. This implies that in xy there are infinitely many positions n0 such that
x(n0 ) = x(n0 + m) = 1 and n0 and n0 + m both belong to arbitrarily high periodic
parts. This is to say, xy (n0 ) = yk0 (or yk0 ) and xy (n0 + m) = yk00 (or yk00 ), where
k 0 , k 00 are arbitrarily large, for instance larger than both k and km and such that
pk0 , pk00 > m. Suppose k 0 < k 00 (the other case is symmetric). Shift (if necessary)
the window [n0 , n0 + m] to the left by a multiple of pk0 so it starts with the boldface
symbol yk0 . Say, this is now [n00 , n00 + m]. The position n00 + m cannot be occupied
by yk000 with k 000 ≤ k 0 because then n0 + m would also be occupied by the same yk000
(while it is by yk00 or yk00 with k 00 > k 0 ). This implies that n00 + m is occupied by
some yk000 or yk000 with k 000 > k 0 . But in such case, since m is smaller than pk000 , it
must be the first occurrence, i.e., yk000 . Since yk0 = 1, k 0 must belong to an interval
[km0 , km0 + m0 ] for some m0 and since k 0 > km , m0 must be larger than or equal to
m. This implies that the occurrence of yk0 in xy (it occurs as xy (n00 )) is followed
by a block of at least m normal font symbols. This is a contradiction since we have
just shown that xy (n00 + m) is a boldface symbol.
      We have proved that if x has an infinite aperiodic part, this part is filled with
zeros except perhaps one 1. This immediately implies that Xy has entropy zero
and is strictly ergodic (in fact, it is isomorphic to the odometer, like the system of
Example 5.1).
   Although the above statement already captures the most important properties
of the Toeplitz subshift Xy , we have not yet guaranteed that
    (1) the sequence xy is irregular with the density of a “true” aperiodic part
         equal to 1 − ρ,
    (2) the odometer (G, τ ) is a factor of Xy .
All these features must be arranged separately, by delicate modifications of y, yet,
which do not destroy what we have already achieved. We will only outline what
needs to be done, skipping the tedious and not very interesting details.
   We must realize that the construction steps of filling in xy corresponds to suc-
cessively defining the associated semicocycle as constant on some clopen subsets
Ck ⊂ G. The positions of these subsets are determined by the scheme; they form a
dense subset of G and have jointly the Haar measure ρ.
   For (1) we need to assure that the cocycle is discontinuous at every point of the
complementary set D ⊂ G. This can be done by making sure that we assign at
least two different values in every neighborhood of every point of D, which can be
achieved by modifying (if necessary) the values of y along a very sparse subsequence,
18                TOMASZ DOWNAROWICZ AND STANISLAW KASJAN


so sparse that it would not affect other properties. Notice that every neighborhood
of every point in D contains infinitely many sets Ck , so we can choose an arbitrarily
sparse subsequence of these sets which visits all such neighborhoods.
   Likewise, for (2) we need the semicocycle to be invariant under no rotation. For
this is suffices that we arrange a discontinuity point “unlike any other”. This can
also be done by very sparse modifications of y. 

                        8. Entropy of the Example 6.3
   We have eliminated the possibility of an “automatic” proof that the entropy in
Example 6.3 is positive just based on the fact that µ generates a subshift with
positive topological entropy. On the other hand, in view of Sarnak’s conjecture, we
are obliged to check positivity of its topological entropy.

Proof of positivity of the entropy of Example 6.3. For short, we will call the squares
of prime numbers the p-squares. They will be denoted by d1 , d2 , d3 , ....
   Let B denote an arbitrary block appearing in the subshift generated by |µ|. Let
n denote the length of B, which we assume is large. Our goal is to indicate a place
(an interval of n consecutive coordinates) where B occurs in |µ| and in the Toeplitz
sequence xy the number of boldface symbols is close to n(1 − ρ) (i.e., nearly realizes
the upper Banach density of such symbols). Recall that ρ is the sum of the inverses
of the periods pk and is smaller than π32 . First we will argue that finding such places
(for all long enough blocks B) suffices for positivity of the topological entropy of
Xy .
   Indeed, let C denote the block appearing in xy over this interval. Then B
can be reconstructed knowing C and two additional data: the positions of all the
normal font symbols in xy in the considered interval and the contents of |µ| at these
positions. Since the number of normal font symbols is not larger than n(ρ + δ),
Lemma 7.1 implies that there are at most 2n possibilities as to how the normal
font symbols are distributed, and then there are at most 2n(ρ+δ) possibilities as to
their contents in |µ|. This produces the estimate
                            #{B} ≤ #{C} · 2n · 2n(ρ+δ) ,
where #{B} and #{C} denote the cardinalities of blocks of length n in |µ| and
in xy , respectively. Since |µ| generates a subshift of entropy π62 log 2, i.e., #{B} is
             2                                                                     2
nearly 26n/π , the cardinality #{C} is (ignoring the small terms) nearly 2n(6/π −ρ) ,
which yields positive topological entropy of Xy whenever ρ < π62 (while we have
assumed it is smaller even than half of that number).
   So, we focus on finding an interval, as specified at the start of the proof. Find
an interval I of length n where B occurs in |µ| (there is such). Positions of zeros
in I can be divided in two classes: first class – coordinates divisible by any of the
p-squares d1 , . . . , dL , where dL is the largest p-square smaller than n, and second
class – the remaining ones (which are divisible by larger p-squares). Note that for
each p-square larger than or equal to n only one of its multiples can occur in I.
Now by the Chinese Reminder Theorem (see e.g. [N],Chap. I) we can shift the
interval I (and call the shifted interval I 0 ), so that
    (1) the shift is by a multiple of d1 d2 · · · dK , where dK is the largest p-square
         smaller than 4n2 , and
                   ODOMETERS AND TOEPLITZ SYSTEMS REVISITED                             19


    (2) zeros of the second class become (after shifting) divisible by some a pri-
        ori selected large p-squares e1 , ..., eq (the choice of these p-squares will be
        specified in a moment).
The zeros of the first class appearing in |µ| over the interval I 0 are precisely the
shifted zeros of the first class over I. All zeros of the second class occurring over
I correspond (via the shift) to zeros of the second class occurring over I 0 , but the
later interval can have more zeros of the second class (some new zeros divisible by
p-squares larger than 4n2 and different from e1 , e2 , . . . , eq can occur here). The
configuration of zeros inherited from I is repeated in |µ| in every interval I 00 along
an arithmetic progression starting with I 0 and advancing with step
                               M = d1 · · · dK · e1 · · · eq ,
(this need not be the smallest step, just one which is sure). From now on we
will observe only the intervals I 00 appearing along this progression. In every such
interval the additional zeros (if there are any) must be divisible by p-squares larger
than or equal to 4n2 . Using Lemmas 8.2 and 8.3, provided at the end of the paper,
one easily obtains, that the percentage (among the observed intervals) of intervals
where there are any additional zeros does not exceed
                                             
                                 Y                   n       1
                       n 1 −       (1 − d1j ) ≤ p       ≤ .
                                                    dK+1     2
                                j>K

In other words, in at least around 1/2 of the observed intervals in |µ| there occurs
precisely the block B.
   It now suffices to arrange that majority (a bit over 1/2 is enough) of these
intervals are such that in the Toeplitz sequence xy there are nearly n(1−ρ) boldface
symbols.
   Recall that H = (pk ) is the scale used to construct xy , and for each k ≥ 1,
pk+1 is an essential multiple of pk (at least times 2). We are going to mark three
“important points” k1 , k2 , k3 on the axis of the parameter k (these points bear
hidden dependence on n, not visible in the denotation).
    k1 : Let k1 be the largest k such that pk < n. Notice that pk ≥ 2k implies
         k1 < ln n/ ln 2, which (for large enough n) is smaller than [n/ ln n].
   Next “important points” require auxiliary functions. Let Nk be the number of
prime factors (in the meaning sum of their multiplicities) of the largest common
divisor of pk and d1 · · · dK . The function k 7→ Nk is nondecreasing and becomes
constant before it reaches 2K + 1. This implies it eventually lies below the line k/2.
    k2 : Let k2 be the largest k (if such exists), for which Nk ≥ k/2. Notice that
         Nk ≤ 2K implies k2 ≤ 4K, which (for n large) is small compared to n (equal
         to four times the number of primes smaller than 2n, i.e., approximately
         8n/ ln 2n). At this point we agree that if k2 < 8n/ ln 2n (or does not exist
         at all), then we put k2 = [8n/ ln 2n]. In particular, this guarantees that
         k2 > k1 .
    k3 : Let k3 be some place, not smaller than k2 , where the function Nk has
         already reached its maximum. At this moment we define the numbers
         e1 , ..., eq , to be relatively prime with pk3 +4q . We can do it now, because the
20                   TOMASZ DOWNAROWICZ AND STANISLAW KASJAN


         particular values of e1 , . . . , eq have not been used in defining the preceding
         points.
   Now consider a similar auxiliary function Mk defined analogously as Nk with M
in place of d1 · · · dK . Note that to the right of k3 + 4q the function Nk does not
grow, while Mk may increase by at most 2q (possibly even in one jump), however,
thank to the specific choice of e1 , ..., eq , this function will never again cross the line
k/2.
   The “important points” are shown on the figure below



                                                                 k/2
                                                                         maxMk

                                                  maxNk




                  k1       k2                   k3               k3+4q


              Figure 4. The function Nk is shown in red, and Mk in green.


   The positions of normal font symbols in xy (equivalently, of zeros in z) we divide
into arithmetic progressions with periods pk (along such a progression xy (i) = yk )
and we classify these progressions in three groups.
     (1) k = 1, . . . , k1
     (2) k = k1 + 1, . . . , k2
     (3) k > k2
(The number k3 is needed only to define e1 , . . . , eq and is not used to separate the
groups.) We will now analyze the progressions according to this classification.
1. Each progression from the first group occupies in every interval of length n
approximately n/pk positions (at most 2n/pk ) for the largest k in the group). The
union of these progressions occupies not more than n(ρ + ) (for large enough n).
2. Every progression from the second group is represented in every interval of length
n by at most one coordinate. Jointly these groups occupy at most 4K positions,
which does not essentially exceed 8n/ ln 2n, i.e., negligibly little compared to n.
   So far we have been estimating the number of normal font symbols in an interval
of length n, and so far it came out close to nρ (i.e., as we need it). From now on we
will estimate the percentage of the “observed” intervals I 00 which are disjoint from
the progressions belonging to the third class.
   3. Consider a k in the third group. The period pk has with M no more than
k/2 common prime divisors. However, pk has at least k prime factors, each equal
to at least 2. This implies that pk /gcd(pk , M ) ≥ 2k/2 . Applying Lemma 8.1 we
conclude that the percentage of intervals I 00 intersecting the progressions from the
                    ODOMETERS AND TOEPLITZ SYSTEMS REVISITED                                  21


third group does not exceed n k>k2 2−k/2 . Since k2 ≥ 8n log 2n, this estimate is
                                P
arbitrarily small for large n.
   To summarize, we can arrange that more than half of the observed intervals I 00
do not intersect any of the progressions from the third and fourth groups. In such
intervals |µ| reads B. Combining this with a previous estimate we obtain that there
exist intervals in which both |µ| reads B and in xy there are nearly n(1−ρ) boldface
symbols, as required. This completes the proof.                                   

   Now the missing lemmas.

Lemma 8.1. Consider a collection of arithmetic progressions of natural numbers
Aj = {kpj + rj : k ∈ N}, where rj ≥ 0 and pj /j → ∞ as j → ∞. Let M be a
natural number and r a nonnegative integer. The upper density of the set
                                             [
                          {k ∈ N : kM + r ∈     Aj }
                                                       j≥1

                           P      1            0       pj
is less than or equal to      j≥1 p0j , where pj = gcd(pj ,M ) for j ≥ 1.

Proof. Given n let Jn denote the maximal number j such that nM + r ≥ pj . Note
that for any n and j:
                                                                 n
                        |{k ∈ N : k ≤ n, kM + r ∈ Aj }| ≤            +1
                                                                 p0j

and the set on the left hand side is empty if j > Jn . It follows that
 1
                                                                                   SJ n
       ∈ N : k ≤ n, kM + r ∈ j≥1 Aj }| = n1 |{k ∈ N : k ≤ n, kM + r ∈
                                  S
 n |{k
    PJn                                         PJn n                                j=1 Aj }| ≤
 1                                          1
 n    j=1 |{k ∈ N : k ≤ n, kM + r ∈ Aj }| ≤ n (( j=1 p0j ) + Jn )


Thanks to our assumption on pj , Jnn → 0 as n → ∞, thus the assertion follows. 

Lemma 8.2. In the family of all subsets of N (or of Z) which have well defined
density, density can be viewed as a finitely additive probability measure. Then
any finite collection of periodic sets with relatively prime periods is stochastically
independent.

Proof. Since every periodic set with period p decomposes as a disjoint union of
finitely many arithmetic progressions with step p, it suffices to prove the lemma for
arithmetic progressions (notice that the density of a progression with step p equals
1
p ). So, let A1 , A2 , . . . , Ak be arithmetic progressions with steps p1 , p2 , . . . , pk . We
need to show that the density of their intersection equals p1 p21...pk . This, however
is obvious, because due to the relative primeness, this intersection is an arithmetic
progression with step p1 p2 . . . pk .                                                          

Lemma 8.3. For any k ≥ 1 we have
                         Y
                            (1 − d1j ) ≥ 1 − √1d .
                                                             k
                                  j≥k
22                        TOMASZ DOWNAROWICZ AND STANISLAW KASJAN


Proof. Recall that dj = qj2 , where qj denote the consecutive primes. Thus

     Y                    Y                        N
                                                   Y                        N
                                                                            Y
           (1 − d1j ) =         (1 − q12 ) = lim         (1 − q12 ) ≥ lim          (1 − n12 ) =
                                      j    N →∞                j    N →∞
     j≥k                  j≥k                      j=k                      n=qk
                                                         qk − 1 N + 1
                                                     lim       ·      = 1 − q1k = 1 − √1d .
                                                    N →∞   qk    N                       k


                                                                                                  

                                              References
[B1] J. Bourgain, Moebius-Walsh correlation bounds and an estimate of Mauduit and Rivat, J.
     d’Anal. Math. 119 (2013), 147–163, arXiv:1112.1423
[B] J. Bourgain, On the correlation of the Moebius function with rank-one system, Journal
     d’Anal. Math. 120 (2013) 105–130, arXiv:1112.1032.
[BSZ] J. Bourgain, P. Sarnak, T. Ziegler, Disjointness of Möbius from horocycle flows, in: From
     Fourier and Number Theory to Radon Transforms and Geometry, in memory of Leon Ehren-
     preiss, Developments in Mathematics, 28 (2012), 6783, Springer Verlag. arXiv:1110.0992.
[CDM] H. Cohen, F. Dress and M. El Marraki, Explicit estimates for summatory functions linked
     to the Möbius µ-function, Funct. Approx. Comment. Math. 37 (2007), 51–63.
[Da] H. Davenport, On some infinite series involving arithmetical functions. II, Quart. J. Math.
     Oxf. 8 (1937), 313-320
[D] T. Downarowicz, Survey of odometers and Toeplitz flows, Contemporary Mathematics, Al-
     gebraic and Topological Dynamics (Kolyada, Manin, Ward eds), 385 (2005), 7–38
[DL] T. Downarowicz and Y. Lacroix Almost 1-1 extensions of Furstenberg-Weiss type, Studia
     Math. 130 (1998), 149–170
[AKL] H. El Abdalaoui, S. Kasjan and M. Lemańczyk, 0-1 sequences of the Thue-Morse type and
     Sarnaks conjecture, preprint, arXiv:1304.3587v2
[ALR] H. El Abdalaoui, M. Lemańczyk and T. de la Rue, On spectral disjointness of powers
     for rank-one transformations and Möbius orthogonality, J. Functional Analysis (to appear),
     arXiv:1301.0134
[GL] A.O. Gelfond and Yu. V. Linnik, Elementary methods in the analytic theory of numbers.
     International Series of Monographs in Pure and Applied Mathematics, Vol. 92 Pergamon
     Press, 1966
[G] B. Green, On (not) computing the Möbius function using bounded depth circuits, Combin.
     Probab. Comput. 21 (2012), 942–951
[GT] B. Green and T. Tao, The Möbius function is strongly orthogonal to nilsequences, Annals
     Math. 175 (2012), 541–566
[HS] K. Halupczok and B. Suger. Partial sums of the Möbius function in arithmetic progressions
     assuming GRH, Funct. Approx. Comment. Math. 48 (2013), 61–90
[KL] J. Kulaga-Przymus and M. Lemańczyk, The Möbius function and continuous T-extensions
     of rotations, preprint, arXiv:1310.2546
[L] E. Lehrer Topological Mixing and Uniquely Ergodic Systems, Israel J. of Math. 57 (1987),
     239–255
[LS] Y. Liu, P. Sarnak, The Möbius function and distal flows, arXiv:1303.4957
[MR] C. Mauduit, J. Rivat, Prime numbers along Rudin-Shapiro sequences (2013),
     http://iml.univ-mrs.fr/r̃ivat/preprints/PNT-RS.pdf
[M] A.F. Möbius, Uber eine besondere Art von Untersuchrung des Reihen, J. reine Angew. Math.
     9 (1832), 105–123
[MH] M. Morse, G. A. Hedlund, Symbolic Dynamics II: Sturmian Trajectories, Amer. J. Math.
     62 (1940), 1–42
[N] W. Narkiewicz, Number theory, World Scientific, Singapore, 1977
[P] K. Prachar Primzahlverteilung, Springer-Verlag, 1957
[RR] O. Ramaré and R. Rumely, Primes in arithmetic progressions, Math. Comp. 65 (1996),
     397–425
[Sa] P. Sarnak, Three Lectures on the Möbius Function Randomness and Dynamics
     http://www.math.ias.edu/files/wam/2011/PSMobius.pdf
                   ODOMETERS AND TOEPLITZ SYSTEMS REVISITED                               23


[Sch] L. Schoenfeld, An improved estimate for the summatory function of the Möbius function,
     Acta Arithmetica 15 (1969), 221–233
     I. Vinogradov, Some theorems concerning the theory of primes. Recueil Math. 2, 179195,
     1937b.
[W] A. Walfisz, Weylsche Exponentialsummen in der neueren Zahlentheorie. Mathematische
     Forschungsberichte, XV. VEB Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften, Berlin 1963

   Tomasz Downarowicz: Institute of Mathematics of the Polish Academy of Sci-
ence, Śniadeckich 8, 00-956 Warszawa, Poland and Institute of Mathematics and Com-
puter Science, Wroclaw University of Technology, Wybrzeże Wyspiańskiego 27, 50-370
Wroclaw, Poland
   E-mail address: downar@pwr.wroc.pl

   Stanislaw Kasjan: Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Nicolaus Coper-
nicus University, 12/18 Chopin street, 87-100 Toruń, Poland
   E-mail address: skasjan@mat.umk.pl
